Title: Learning Invariant Visual Representations for Planning with Joint-Embedding Predictive World Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.18639v1

Published Time: Tue, 24 Feb 2026 01:16:16 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# Learning Invariant Visual Representations for Planning with Joint-Embedding Predictive World Models 

Leonardo F. Toso * 1 Davit Shadunts * 1 Yunyang Lu * 1 Nihal Sharma 2 Donglin Zhan 1

Nam H. Nguyen 2 James Anderson 1

# Abstract 

World models learned from high-dimensional vi-sual observations allow agents to make decisions and plan directly in latent space, avoiding pixel-level reconstruction. However, recent latent pre-dictive architectures (JEPAs), including the DINO world model (DINO-WM), display a degradation in test time robustness due to their sensitivity to “slow features”. These include visual variations such as background changes and distractors that are irrelevant to the task being solved. We ad-dress this limitation by augmenting the predic-tive objective with a bisimulation encoder that en-forces control-relevant state equivalence, mapping states with similar transition dynamics to nearby latent states while limiting contributions from slow features. We evaluate our model on a sim-ple navigation task under different test-time back-ground changes and visual distractors. Across all benchmarks, our model consistently improves robustness to slow features while operating in a reduced latent space, up to 10 × smaller than that of DINO-WM. Moreover, our model is agnostic to the choice of pretrained visual encoder and maintains robustness when paired with DINOv2, SimDINOv2, and iBOT features. 

# 1. Introduction 

Constructing spatial and temporal models of the world to predict future outcomes and guide decisions is a crucial capa-bility of the human brain (Shadmehr & Mussa-Ivaldi, 2012). In machine learning, this is mirrored through world models that are learned from high-dimensional visual observations, enabling efficient prediction, planning, and control by rea-soning over learned latent dynamics rather than raw sensory inputs. Planning with such a “compressed” representation of the environment dynamics has become a cornerstone of 

> *

Equal contribution 1Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, USA. 2Capital One, USA. Corre-spondence to: Leonardo F. Toso <leonardo.toso@columbia.edu >.

contemporary robotics (Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018; Hafner et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2025), model-based reinforcement learning (RL), and control (Hafner et al., 2019; 2021; Ebert et al., 2018; Thuruthel et al., 2018; Matsuo et al., 2022; Khorrambakht et al., 2025) as it provides data efficiency and generalization across tasks while avoiding online interaction and visual reconstruction (Sobal et al., 2025). An impactful line of recent work centers on Joint Embed-ding Predictive Architectures (JEPAs), which eschew recon-struction of raw observations in favor of learning represen-tations by predicting future latent embeddings (Grill et al., 2020; Caron et al., 2021; LeCun, 2022; Assran et al., 2023; Sobal et al., 2025; Balestriero & LeCun, 2025). Building on JEPAs, the DINO world model (DINO-WM) (Zhou et al., 2025) learns a latent predictive dynamic by encoding visual observations through a pretrained DINOv2 feature extractor (Oquab et al., 2023). This yields zero-shot planning, with a pretrained, reward-free world model on entirely new tasks. Despite their empirical success, JEPAs suffer from a fun-damental limitation: they pay too much attention to slowly changing and task-irrelevant features (LeCun, 2022; Sobal et al., 2022). These slow features refer to aspects of the raw observations that change gradually over time, but are irrel-evant for planning, such as background textures, lighting, camera viewpoints, and distractors. In the presence of slow features, the predictive objective in JEPA can be minimized by encoding only such temporally consistent information, yielding degenerate solutions. As a result, world models trained under fixed visual conditions often fail to generalize when the background changes at test time (despite identi-cal underlying object dynamics). This limitation has been discussed in (Sobal et al., 2022) for JEPAs and empirically observed to be true for DINO-WM (Figure 2-(Right)). Importantly, this limitation cannot be fully resolved by larger visual foundation models alone (such as DINOv2 (Oquab et al., 2023), SimDINOv2 (Wu et al., 2025), iBOT (Zhou et al., 2021), masked autoencoders (He et al., 2022), among others) as they also extract control-irrelevant infor-mation. Even with invariant perception modules, the learned latent dynamics may still entangle control-relevant states with nuisance visual features, leading to brittle planning 1

> arXiv:2602.18639v1 [cs.LG] 20 Feb 2026 Learning Invariant Visual Representations for Planning with JEPAs

under visual distribution shifts at test time. Ideally, a world model should encode only those aspects of the state that are relevant for predicting future states, while being invariant to task-irrelevant visual factors. 

Question. Can we learn latent world models that retain the joint-embedding predictive strengths while also being robust to the slow features? We address this question using bisimulation metrics for learning invariant representations on top of pretrained vi-sual feature extractors (i.e., DINOv2, SimDINOv2, iBOT). These metrics define state equivalences based on immediate rewards and transition dynamics, and have been studied as a principled foundation for state abstraction in Markov De-cision Processes (MDPs) (Ferns et al., 2004; Castro et al., 2009), transfer learning (Castro & Precup, 2010), and invari-ant representation learning (Zhang et al., 2021; Kemertas & Aumentado-Armstrong, 2021; Tkachev & Abate, 2011; Shimizu & Tomizuka, 2025). By construction, encoders trained with a bisimulation regularizer discard nuisance fea-tures that do not affect control, making it a natural candidate for addressing the slow-feature limitation of JEPAs. 

Key Point. DINO-WM (Zhou et al., 2025) displays a substantial degradation in performance on relatively simple navigation tasks (e.g., PointMaze (Fu et al., 2020)) when evaluated under background changes and visual distractors at test time (see Figure 2-(Right)). To address this, we propose a bisimulation encoder 

for visual world models that augments latent dynam-ics with an on-policy bisimulation objective, enforcing invariance in the learned latent space. The bisimula-tion encoder is trained jointly with the transition model, enforcing states with similar transition behavior to be mapped to nearby latent embeddings while discarding task-irrelevant visual information (see Figure 1). Im-portantly, we also show that explicit reward prediction is not fundamental to learning invariant world-model representations, thereby simplifying training. 

Contributions. Our main contributions are as follows: 

• We propose a bisimulation encoder for visual world mod-els that enforces control-relevant state equivalence while discarding task-irrelevant visual features from pretrained vi-sual feature extractors (e.g., DINOv2, SimDINOv2, iBOT). 

• We integrate the bisimulation objective into a latent predic-tive world model architecture (see Figure 2-(Left)), showing that invariant representations can be learned jointly with the transition model without relying on reward prediction. 

• We show that our bisimulation encoder yields robust plan-ning performance under several background changes and a moving distractor for a navigation task, with latent embed-dings dimensions that are 10 × smaller than DINO-WM. 

• We validate our model with three different pretrained vi-          

> Figure 1. Visually distinct observations that differ only in back-ground (checkerboard and gradient) are first mapped to latent embeddings Zand Z′by a pretrained encoder (initial state in green, goal in red). A bisimulation encoder then projects these into lower-dimensional representations Wand W′, which are equivalent under on-policy transition dynamics. In contrast, an observation with different underlying dynamics is mapped to ˜W
> and separated in the bisimulation space.

sual encoder backbones: DINOv2, SimDINOv2, and iBOT, namely, and show consistent robustness over slow features when compared to DINO-WM (Zhou et al., 2025) both with and without domain randomization (Tobin et al., 2017). 

# 2. Related Work 

• Joint embedding predictive architectures (JEPAs). 

Joint embedding predictive architectures learn feature rep-resentations by predicting future latent states rather than reconstructing observations (Grill et al., 2020; Caron et al., 2021; LeCun, 2022; Assran et al., 2023; Sobal et al., 2025; Balestriero & LeCun, 2025). Most relevant to our work is DINO-WM (Zhou et al., 2025) that learns latent dynamics directly in the space of pretrained DINOv2 visual features (Oquab et al., 2023), avoiding pixel-level reconstruction. However, latent prediction in DINO-WM remains sensitive to slow, control-irrelevant features. We address this limita-tion by augmenting the predictive objective with a bisimula-tion encoder to enforce control-relevant invariances. 

• Bisimulation metrics and invariant representations. 

Bisimulation provides a principled way of behavioral equiv-alence in MDPs by quantifying approximate equivalence through reward discrepancies and mismatches in future state distributions for different states under the same policy (Ferns et al., 2011; Abate, 2013). Most relevant to our work is BS-MPC in (Shimizu & Tomizuka, 2025), which incorporates a bisimulation metric loss for model predictive control (Kou-varitakis & Cannon, 2016; Lenz et al., 2015; Williams et al., 2017). In contrast to (Shimizu & Tomizuka, 2025), we lever-age bisimulation metrics to “filter out” control-irrelevant information from a pretrained feature space (e.g., that of DINOv2, SimDINOv2, iBOT). Moreover, we jointly train our prediction model without relying on reward prediction. 

• Model-based control with latent world models. Model-based RL with world models enable planning by rolling out 2Learning Invariant Visual Representations for Planning with JEPAs     

> Figure 2. Left. Model architecture and training objectives. Visual observations are encoded using a frozen pretrained visual encoder, followed by a bisimulation encoder that maps features into a low-dimensional, control-relevant latent space. The bisimulation loss is trained jointly with the latent transition model, enforcing invariance to task-irrelevant visual features. Right. Rollouts for PointMaze navigation under a background change at test time. For clarity, the background change is not depicted in the figure. See Section 5.3 for details on background changes. While DINO-WM fails to reach the goal due to background change our model succeeds.

learned dynamics in a compact latent space, which has been effective for high-dimensional tasks (Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018; Hafner et al., 2019; 2020). In robotics, latent dy-namics models are commonly paired with sampling-based optimizers for action selection, including the cross-entropy method (CEM), which is widely used for planning with learned world models (Rubinstein & Kroese, 2004; Zhou et al., 2025). Our control stack follows this line, we plan with CEM with the learned latent dynamics, and focus on the representation learning side, i.e., how to learn a latent space that is robust to slow features so that planning remains reliable under visual distribution shifts in test time. 

# 3. Preliminaries 

We now introduce the notation and preliminaries on JEPAs, bisimulation metrics, and invariant representation learning. Throughout, we consider a vision-based control task given by a partially observable MDP (POMDP) that evolves in discrete time t ∈ { 0, 1, 2, . . . }. An observation is an RGB image ot ∈ O , an action is denoted by at ∈ A , and a tra-jectory is a sequence (ot, a t, o t+1 , a t+1 , . . . ). We denote the data distribution induced by a behavior policy π by Dπ ,meaning that (ot, a t, o t+1 ) ∼ D π when rollouts are gener-ated by playing the environment with π. We use EDπ [·] to denote the expectation with respect to this data distribution. 

3.1. Joint-Embedding Predictive Architectures 

JEPAs learn a visual encoder fθ : O → Rdz that maps an observation ot to a latent embedding, i.e., zt = fθ (ot) ∈

Rdz , where dz is the embedding dimension and θ is the vector of encoder parameters. Jointly, a predictor (i.e., latent dynamics model) ˜Tϕ : Rdz × A → Rdz is trained to map the current latent state and action to a predicted next latent state ˆzt+1 = ˜Tϕ (zt, a t) , with parameters ϕ.Since representations are defined up to arbitrary invertible transformations, JEPA training includes a target embedding. The target is denoted by zt+1 = fθ (ot+1 ). The JEPA objec-tive minimizes the prediction loss between ˆzt+1 and zt+1 ,

Lpred (θ, ϕ ) = EDπ

h

ℓ

 ˜Tϕ (fθ (ot) , a t) , f θ (ot+1 )

i 

, (1) where ℓ : Rdz × Rdz → R+ is the mean squared error. We emphasize that DINO-WM (Zhou et al., 2025), follow this principle, with the key distinction that the visual en-coder parameters θ are fixed and not learned during training. Therefore, observations are first mapped to latent embed-dings using a pretrained visual foundation model (e.g., DI-NOv2 (Oquab et al., 2023)), and a predictive dynamics model is trained on top of that latent space. Here, we also treat the pretrained visual encoder as fixed and train an extra bisimulation encoder jointly with the dynamics on top of it. 

Remark 3.1 (Slow Features) . We emphasize that JEPAs in-advertently focus on the slow features. In particular, when observations contain static backgrounds or persistent dis-tractors that vary slowly relative to task-relevant dynamics, the prediction loss (1) can be minimized by encoding such features into the latent embedding zt = fθ (ot), since they induce small temporal differences ∥zt+1 − zt∥. As a re-sult, slowly varying nuisance information may dominate the predictive objective, leading to latent embeddings that fail to capture the underlying task structure (Sobal et al., 2022) and thus are not generalizable to background changes at test time (see Figure 2-(Right)). This limitation moti-vates the use of bisimulation. By defining latent distances in terms of on-policy transition behavior, bisimulation induces representations that collapse nuisance visual features while preserving the task-relevant information for planning. 

3.2. Bisimulation Metric 

Let us now (informally) revisit the definition of on-policy bisimulation metrics from (Castro, 2020). Intuitively, two latent states, in the pretrained visual encoder space, z and z′

are “bisimilar” if they induce similar immediate rewards (for optimality equivalence) and similar future state evolution (for dynamics equivalence) under the same actions. Here, the environment is partially observed and represented through latent embeddings obtained from a visual encoder 3Learning Invariant Visual Representations for Planning with JEPAs 

(e.g., DINOv2, SimDINOv2, iBOT). The goal is to learn a lower-dimensional representation w = hη (z) ∈ Rdw , with 

dw ≪ dz , that preserves control-relevant structure while discarding nuisance visual variation. We formalize state equivalence with the on-policy bisimulation metric. 

Definition 3.2 (On-Policy Bisimulation Metric (Castro, 2020)) . Given a policy π, a reward function r(z, a ), and a transition kernel Pπ (· | z) induced by π, the on-policy bisimulation metric is 

dπ (z, z ′) = |rπ (z) − rπ (z′)|

| {z }

> reward similarity

+γ W 1 (Pπ (· | z), P π (· | z′)) 

| {z }

> dynamics similarity

,

where rπ (z) = Ea∼π(·| z)[r(z, a )] , γ ∈ (0 , 1) is a discount factor, and W1 denotes the 1-Wasserstein distance. 

On Dropping the Reward Term. Note that dπ (z, z ′)

has two terms: a reward similarity term |rπ (z)−rπ (z′)|

and a dynamics similarity term measured via the 1-Wasserstein distance (Givens & Shortt, 1984). The reward term ensures that if two state trajectories are similar, they are not collapsed if they yield different rewards. In particular, such reward discrepancy is cru-cial when bisimulation is used for policy transfer or value-function approximation (Ferns et al., 2004; Cas-tro et al., 2009; Castro & Precup, 2010). However, for the purpose of learning an invariant representation for JEPAs, we claim that this term is not fundamen-tal. This is because the transition term alone induces a meaningful notion of equivalence: states that exhibit similar evolution under the same action sequences are mapped to nearby representations in the bisimulation latent space (see the illustration in Figure 1) Moreover, dropping the reward term is well aligned with JEPAs, which are inherently reward-free and focus on pre-dictive consistency in latent space. Incorporating rewards would require task-specific supervision and would break the modularity between representation learning and zero-shot downstream planning. Accordingly, we omit the reward term in our implementation and rely only on approximating the Wasserstein transition similarity to enforce invariance. This design choice is further supported numerically in Sec-tion 5, where a reward predictor is included. 

3.3. Learning Invariant Representations 

Now, we discuss the invariant representation learning prob-lem for our joint-embedding predictive world model. Recall that zt = fθ (ot) ∈ Rdz typically contains both control-relevant information and nuisance features. Our goal is to learn an encoder wt = hη (zt) ∈ Rdw , that limits the contribution of the slow features in the transition dynamics. To do so, we jointly learn the dynamics in the bisimula-tion space through Tϕ : Rdw × A → Rdw , such that 

ˆwt+1 = Tϕ (wt, a t) predicts the next latent state. With the notation set up in Section 3.1, we have the predictive dynamics augmented with the bisimulation encoder, i.e., 

Tϕ(hη (fθ (ot)) , a t), where again θ is fixed. To connect invariance to bisimulation, we consider an ab-stract state space W ⊆ Rdw equipped with the metric dπ .We aim to learn hη and Tϕ jointly so that the distances in 

W approximate an on-policy bisimulation metric, meaning that states that are equivalent for control under rollouts are mapped nearby in such latent space. We do this by opti-mizing a bisimulation objective that aligns pairwise latent distances with a target quantity that compares on-policy dynamics. Concretely, for a pair of observation, action, and next observation (ot, a t, o t+1 ) and  o′

> t

, a ′

> t

, o ′

> t+1

 drawn from Dπ , we have the latent states 

zt = fθ (ot) , z ′ 

> t

= fθ (o′

> t

)

| {z }

> Pretrained latents

, w t = hη (zt) , w ′ 

> t

= hη (z′

> t

)

| {z }

> Bisimulation latents

.

The transition dynamics Tϕ is trained using 

Ldyn (η, ϕ ) ≜ EDπ

h

∥hη (fθ (ot+1 )) −Tϕ (hη (fθ (ot)) , a t)∥2i

,

and we note that, in practice, as we do not have Dπ , we compute the empirical mean instead (i.e., MSE). On the other hand, for invariance, our loss encourages the distance ∥wt − w′

> t

∥2 to match a control-relevant similarity signal measured by the bisimulation metric. We define the on-policy one-step bisimulation target between states as ∆bisim (η, ϕ ) ≜ γ ∥Tϕ (wt, a t) − Tϕ (w′

> t

, a ′

> t

)∥2 , where it compares the predicted next latent states under the learned dynamics. We fit the bisimulation encoder by minimizing 

Lbisim (η, ϕ ) ≜ EDπ

h

(∥wt − w′

> t

∥2 − ∆bisim (η, ϕ )) 2i

.

Finally, we define the overall training objective as 

Ljepa −bisim (η, ϕ ) ≜ Ldyn (η, ϕ ) + λbisim Lbisim (η, ϕ ) , (2) with λbisim > 0 being the regularization weight. Minimizing the loss formalizes our goal of learning a com-pact latent space that preserves on-policy predictive struc-ture for planning while suppressing task-irrelevant visual features. We next describe the architecture, loss instantia-tion, and planning in the learned bisimulation space. 

# 4. Our World Model 

We now describe our architecture for learning invariant world models that builds on pretrained visual features (DI-NOv2, SimDINOv2, and iBOT) and augments them with a bisimulation encoder to suppress task-irrelevant informa-tion. The model learns latent transition dynamics and per-forms planning via MPC with CEM. An overview of the full pipeline and training objectives is shown in Figure 2-(Left). 4Learning Invariant Visual Representations for Planning with JEPAs 

4.1. Pretrained Visual Encoders 

In our experiments, we consider three self-supervised visual encoders: DINOv2 (Oquab et al., 2023) (with ViT-S/14), SimDINOv2 (Wu et al., 2025) (with ViT-B/16), and iBOT (Zhou et al., 2021) (with ViT-S/16). These are trained on large-scale image datasets using joint embedding or masked prediction objectives and have been shown to produce se-mantically rich visual features (Jiang et al., 2023). These visual encoders are patch-based , namely, fθ : O → 

RNp×dz , where Np is the number of patches. Most im-portantly, they are trained without access to the transition dynamics, actions and/or rewards, and thus capture generic 

visual features rather than control-relevant structure. In particular, they are not tailored for planning and are not fine-tuned to allow for visual shifts in test time. Our goal is to adapt their feature embeddings by learning an additional bisimulation encoder on top of {zt}t (see Figure 2-(Left)). When using DINOv2 features, we refer to our model as DINO-Bisim. Similarly, we use SimDINO-Bisim and iBOT-Bisim when paired with SimDINOv2 and iBOT visual fea-ture extractors, respectively. 

4.2. Bisimulation Encoder 

Given pretrained visual embeddings zt, we learn a bisim-ulation encoder hη : RNp×dz → RNp×dw , w t = hη (zt),

as discussed in Section 3.2. We note that in contrast to (Zhang et al., 2021; Shimizu & Tomizuka, 2025), our bisim-ulation encoder is designed in patches (we refer the reader to Appendix A.1.3 for details). Such encoder consists of a per-patch residual MLP projection head (Linear-ResMLP-Linear) that maps each DINOv2 patch embedding (or raw image patch) into a dw = 32 dimensional latent, followed by learned spatial positional embeddings and LayerNorm. This encoder is trained to ensure that distances in the w-space reflect on-policy bisimulation distances, as defined in (2) . To this end, we flatten the spatial patch features prior to computing the previously defined losses and com-pare states across different trajectories that are stored in a replay buffer , following (Zhang et al., 2021). However, minimizing the bisimulation loss admits degenerate solu-tions as mapping all states to a single representation trivially minimizes pairwise distances, and we refer to this as the representation collapse . To circumvent such collapse, prior work (Bardes et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2023) has adopted variance-invariance-covariance regularization (VICReg) to guarantee that each latent dimension keeps sufficient vari-ance over batches of states. We refer the reader to (Bardes et al., 2021, Section 4.1) for an excellent overview of the approach. Here, invariance is given by the bisimulation loss. In our setting, however, the standard VICReg (Bardes et al., 2021) may be insufficient. This is because, for the pre-trained visual encoders considered in this work (i.e., DI- 

> Figure 3. First principal component (PC1) of latent embeddings produced by different visual feature encoders for a PointMaze observation. In all cases, PC1 captures a large percentage of the total variance and predominantly encodes background and layout information rather than control-relevant features, motivating our PCA-based VICReg in the bisimulation encoder.

NOv2, SimDINOv2, and iBOT) a large fraction of the vari-ance is often concentrated in a small number of principal components that correlate with the slow features rather than task-relevant dynamics. Therefore, by imposing a uniform variance across all coordinates may preserve nuisance visual features, preventing the bisimulation encoder from collaps-ing the task-irrelevant information (see Appendix A.2). Leveraging this insight, we propose a PCA-based VCReg loss, which adapts VICReg to pretrained visual embeddings by guaranteeing a minimum variance in directions that are not dominated by a large fraction of slow features. 

4.3. PCA-based Variance Covariance Regularization 

As illustrated in Figure 3, the pretrained visual embeddings from DINOv2, SimDINOv2, and iBOT, allocate a large amount of variance to the first principal component (PC1), which are correlated with task-irrelevant features coming from backgrounds and distractors. If we use the standard VICReg loss with uniform variance across the coordinates of the bisimulation latent space, the optimizer may still pre-serve such irrelevant directions simply to satisfy the variance threshold, conflicting with the goal of learning a representa-tion invariant to those slow features. Therefore, we do VICReg in the PCA basis of the current batch. Let Wc ≜ (w1 − ¯w)⊤ . . . (wB − ¯w)⊤ , be the matrix with centered embeddings in the batch of size B,where ¯w is the average. We define the empirical covariance 

Σ ≜ W ⊤  

> cWc
> B−1

, and further compute its eigendecomposition as Σ = U ΛU ⊤, where Λ = diag( λ1, . . . , λ dw ). We extract the PCA coordinates ˜wb = U ⊤(wb − ¯w), and let ˜Wc be the batch matrix with rows ˜w⊤ 

> b

.To construct the PCA-based VICReg loss, we only en-force the variance floor on the tail PCs, namely indices 

i ∈ { i0, . . . , d w}, where i0 is a cutoff index (e.g., i0 = 2 ). Let κi ≜ σmin − √λi + ϵ and write the variance term 

Lpca -var (η) ≜ 1

dw − i0 + 1 

> dw

X

> i=i0

[max (0 , κ i)] 2 .

where ϵ > 0 is a small constant for numerical stability and 

σmin denotes a minimum standard deviation. On the other hand, we regularize cross-covariances as 5Learning Invariant Visual Representations for Planning with JEPAs 

Lpca -cov (η) ≜ 1

dw(dw − 1) 

X

> p̸=q

 ˜Σpq 

2

, ˜Σ ≜ ˜W ⊤ 

> c

˜Wc

B − 1 ,

where ˜Σpq denotes the (p, q ) entry of the covariance in PCs coordinates, namely, the covariance matrix ˜Σ.Therefore, we combine the two PCA-based terms 

Lpca -vc (η) ≜ αv Lpca -var (η) + αc Lpca -cov (η),

with weights αv, α c > 0, to the predictive loss (2). We refer the reader to Appendix A.2 for details on how the PCA-based VICReg loss is implemented and empirical evidence on how it helps the representation collapse while keeping control-relevant features. We emphasize that if the visual encoder does not isolate control-irrelevant features within a dominant principal component, the PCA-based VICReg regularization becomes optional . In this case, the bisimulation-based encoder alone can mitigate, though only partially, the influence of task-irrelevant variations in the learned representation. 

On the PCA-based VICReg. By not enforcing a mini-mum variance on the leading PCA components i < i 0,the bisimulation encoder can collapse the directions that are dominated by slow features, which concentrate in the top components of the pretrained features. At the same time, enforcing a variance floor on the tail compo-nents i ≥ i0 prevents w ≡ constant and ensures that the representation retains sufficient diversity to sepa-rate control-relevant states. The covariance loss further yields information to be spread across coordinates. 

Implementation. Our bisimulation encoder is initialized with random parameters and is first trained using the stan-dard VICReg objective (Bardes et al., 2021) for a small number of epochs ( k) to stabilize representation learning. We then perform a one-time principal component analy-sis to identify the dominant direction associated with task-irrelevant information. After k (to be set by the practitioner) epochs, we replace the standard VICReg loss with the PCA-based one, which helps to suppresses the additional variance along the identified principal component directions. 

4.4. Transition Model 

We model latent dynamics using a vision transformer that predicts the next state in the bisimulation latent space. Fol-lowing DINO-WM (Zhou et al., 2025), the vision trans-former architecture (Dosovitskiy, 2020) is suitable for pro-cessing the underlying patch-based embeddings. Since the bisimulation latent states are already represented as sequences of patch embeddings, we remove the ViT to-kenization layer, yielding a decoder-only transformer. The transition model takes as input a history of past bisimu-lation latent states and actions across multiple trajectories, 

{(wj,t −H:t−1, a j,t −H:t−1)}Ntraj 

> j=1

, where H denotes the con-text length and Ntraj the number of trajectories, and it pre-dicts the next latent state ˆwt (i.e., in the bisimulation space). Note that the subscript j denotes the trajectory embedding and action at time step t.To respect temporal causality, a causal attention mask is implemented (as in (Zhou et al., 2025)) ensuring that predic-tions at time t depend only on past latent states and actions. More precisely, each patch embedding wit attends to the corresponding patch embeddings {wit−H:t−1}Np 

> i=1

over the context. Predicting all patches jointly yields global spatial structure and temporal dynamics that improves temporal generalization as discussed in (Zhou et al., 2025). By “filtering out” task-irrelevant visual features, the bisim-ulation encoder enables the transition model to learn dy-namics that are invariant. The learned joint-embedding predictive world model is then used for planning via MPC (Kouvaritakis & Cannon, 2016), with actions selected using the cross-entropy method (CEM). 

4.5. Planning 

The MPC approach selects the actions whose predicted latent rollouts reach a desired goal observation. That is, given an initial observation o0 and a goal observation og , our model will first compute their latents through the pretrained visual and bisimulation encoders, 

z0 = fθ (o0), z g = fθ (og ), w 0 = hη (z0), w g = hη (zg ).Starting from w0, the transition model is used to rollout predicted states under a candidate action sequence {at}T −1 

> t=0

,i.e., { ˆwt+1 }T −1 

> t=0

= Tϕ( ˆ wt, {at}t), with ˆw0 = w0. Planning is then cast as minimizing a terminal cost that is the differ-ence between the predicted final latent state and the goal latent state, 

c(wT , {at}t) = ∥ ˆwT ({at}t) − wg ∥2 . (3) For brevity, we omit the explicit dependence on the action sequence and write c(wT ) = ∥ ˆwT − wg ∥2.

4.6. A Generalization Bound 

Before turning to the experiments, we also provide a theo-retical justification for learning bisimulation-based represen-tations on top of JEPA latents. Let us first define the T -step on-policy cost-to-go as follows: 

JπT (z) ≜ E

"T −1X

> t=0

γtc (hη (zt)) | z0 = z

#

, z t+1 ∼ Pπ (· | zt),

where the expectation is taken over trajectories {zt}Tt=0 

induced by policy π and transition kernel Pπ starting from a visual pretrained latent state z0 = z.

Theorem 4.1 (Reward-free planning generalization bound) .

Suppose hη (·) ε-approximately preserves the reward-free 

6Learning Invariant Visual Representations for Planning with JEPAs 

bisimulation metric in the sense that 

∥hη (z) − hη (z′)∥2 − dπ (z, z ′) ≤ ε, for any z, z ′.

In addition, suppose that hη (·) is uniformly bounded as 

∥hη (z)∥2 ≤ Hw for all z and thus ∥wg ∥2 ≤ Hw. Then for any two pretrained visual latent embeddings z, z ′,

|JπT (z) − JπT (z′)| ≤ 8HwT d π (z, z ′).

We defer the proof of this result to Appendix A.8. We also note that the linear dependence on the horizon T

contrasts with the (1 −γT )/(1 −γ) dependence from (Zhang et al., 2021; Shimizu & Tomizuka, 2025). This difference arises from dropping the reward term in the bisimulation metric: while reward-aware bisimulation enables geometric discounting of cost discrepancies through immediate reward alignment, a reward-free metric propagates the discrepan-cies through the transition dynamics, yielding a cumulative horizon-dependent bound. In this sense, the T factor can be interpreted as the price paid for enforcing control-relevant invariance without task-specific reward supervision. 

Key Takeaway. The above result implies that if two latent states in the pretrained visual encoder space dif-fer only due to nuisance visual variations, such as slow features, then their induced planning behavior remains similar. More concretely, let z = fθ (o) embed a Point-Maze scene with a checkerboard background, and let 

z′ = fθ (o′) embed the same scene with a gradient background (see Figure 1), since these visual changes do not affect on-policy transition behavior, the bisim-ulation distance dπ (z, z ′) is small. Consequently, the difference in the induced planning cost is bounded by O (dπ (z, z ′) T ). Therefore, robustness of planning when starting from w or w′ in the bisimulation latent space is governed by their distance in that space. 

# 5. Experiments 

We now evaluate our world model. Our experiments assess robustness to slow, task-irrelevant visual features, such as background changes and distractors, and isolate their impact on the planning performance. We compare our model to DINO-WM (Zhou et al., 2025) and domain randomization (DR) (Tobin et al., 2017) for a simple navigation task under different visual conditions, and pretrained visual encoders. 

5.1. A Simple Navigation Task 

We evaluate our model on a simple navigation task: the Mu-JoCo PointMaze (Fu et al., 2020). This is commonly used as benchmark for goal-conditioned planning and navigation from visual observations (Fu et al., 2020; Sobal et al., 2025; Zhou et al., 2025; Parthasarathy et al., 2025). Despite its simplicity, PointMaze provides a controlled setting to assess robustness to background changes and distractors, while keeping the transition dynamics fixed. Further details on the task setup are provided in Appendix A.3. Although PointMaze is a fairly simple navigation task, we observe that DINO-WM has a substantial drop in the per-formance under test-time background changes and moving distractors. This highlights that even for a simple task, sen-sitivity to slow features can negatively impact planning, motivating the need for an invariant latent representation. 

Evaluation Metric. We report performance using the suc-cess rate (SR), defined as the fraction of successful episodes over 50 independently sampled initial and goal pairs. An episode is considered successful if the agent approximately reaches the goal region within a fixed number of steps. 

5.2. Baseline 

We compare our model with two baselines: DINO-WM (Zhou et al., 2025) and domain DR (Tobin et al., 2017). Both baselines are evaluated under the same task, planning horizon, and evaluation metric previously described. 

DINO-WM. We use the original DINO-WM architecture as proposed in (Zhou et al., 2025). The model operates directly on pretrained DINOv2 patch embeddings with 196 patches, each of dimensionality 384 , and learns latent dynamics with-out explicit invariance regularization. DINO-WM is trained with a batch size of 32 .

Domain Randomization (DR). We also train DINO-WM with domain randomization (Tobin et al., 2017). In partic-ular, we randomize the visual appearance of the task for 

40% of the training dataset by applying background color changes and gradient-based background modifications, for the PointMaze task. To avoid introducing spurious tempo-ral artifacts, the randomized background is kept consistent across trajectories. We refer the reader to Appendix A.5. Our model adopts the same number of visual patches (i.e., 

196 ) as DINO-WM, but introduce a bisimulation encoder that maps each patch to a 32 -dimensional latent embedding (see Figure 6). This leads to a latent space that is 10 × lower-dimensional than the 384 -dimensional patch embeddings used by DINO-WM. Our model is trained with a batch size of 20 . We refer the reader to Appendix A.1.4 for details on the model hyperparameters. 

5.3. Background Changes 

We consider different background changes and a moving distractor (see Figure 4) that alter the visual appearance of the scene while preserving the underlying transition dy-namics. These changes are applied only at test time, unless otherwise stated, and are designed to isolate the effect of slow features on the planning performance. 7Learning Invariant Visual Representations for Planning with JEPAs        

> Figure 4. The six different scenarios that we use to measure robust-ness based on PointMaze with checkerboard background. From left to right, these are: NC : No Change, SC : Slight background Change , C: Color gradient background, LC : Large Color back-ground Change, LCG : Large Color Gradient background change, and D: moving Distractors with yellow and magenta dots.

5.4. Results 

Table 1 reports the success rate for the PointMaze task under background changes and a moving distractor. Results for PointMaze correspond to models trained for 50 epochs. 

Robustness to the background. We note that DINO-WM displays degradation in performance when the visual background is different from the one seen when training (NC). For instance, in the PointMaze task, while DINO-WM achieves 0.8 success rate under NC, its performance drops for SC, 0.72 , and it drops even more under aggressive changes, such as LCG, achieving 0.48 success rate. In contrast, our model consistently achieves high success rates across background changes in PointMaze (around 0.76 

success). This highlights that invariance with the bisimula-tion encoder effectively “filters out” background-dependent features from the latent dynamics, leading to reliable plan-ning despite significant visual changes. 

Comparison with DR. Domain randomization performs well when test-time backgrounds resemble combinations of visual changes observed during training ( 0.82 success rate for NC, SC, and C). However, its performance degrades substantially under an aggressive background change (LCG) that are not covered by the randomized training distribution, i.e., achieving 0.64 success rate. 

Moving distractor. Under the moving distractor, DINO-WM again has its performance dropped, indicating that per-sistent but task-irrelevant motion in the background can also dominate the learned latent dynamics. Our model remains consistent, as the distractor does not affect the transition dy-namics and is then suppressed by the bisimulation encoder.  

> Table 1. Success rate of DINO-Bisim under different scenarios (Figure 4) compared to DINO-WM with and without DR.

Model NC SC C LC LCG D 

> DINO-WM

0.80 0.72 0.60 0.56 0.48 0.78  

> w/DR

0.82 0.82 0.82 0.68 0.64 0.82 

Ours 0.78 0.80 0.76 0.86 0.78 0.82 

5.5. On Different Pretrained Visual Encoders 

Table 2 reports the success rate achieved by our model when using different pretrained visual encoders. We observe that training the model end-to-end without DINOv2 features results in a clear degradation in performance (e.g., a success rate of 0.26 under LC) compared to training with DINOv2 (0.86 success rate under LC). This behavior is expected, as learning accurate latent transition dynamics relies on sufficiently informative visual representations. We further evaluate robustness using SimDINOv2 and iBOT features. SimDINOv2 (with ViT-B/16) produces patch em-beddings of higher dimensionality than DINOv2 (768 com-pared to the 384 of DINOv2). As all models are trained with the same number of samples, the larger feature dimension-ality may lead to a lower success rate (for example due to overfitting). Nevertheless, performance remains consistent across background changes, indicating that our bisimulation encoder continues to suppress task-irrelevant visual features coming from SimDINOv2 embeddings. On the other hand, with iBOT features our model achieves strong planning performance (around 0.72 success rate) and robustness comparable to the model with DINOv2, further indicating that the proposed approach generalizes to differ-ent pretrained visual encoders.  

> Table 2. Success rate with different pretrained visual encoder back-bones under the different scenarios from Figure 4.

Model NC SC C LC LCG D 

> No Encoder

0.68 0.44 0.70 0.26 0.36 0.64  

> DINOv2

0.78 0.8 0.76 0.86 0.78 0.82  

> SimDINOv2

0.40 0.38 0.36 0.42 0.42 0.36  

> iBOT

0.72 0.70 0.74 0.72 0.72 0.72 

5.6. On the Reward-aware Bisimulation Encoder 

Prior work on bisimulation-based MPC incorporates an ex-plicit reward predictor as part of the bisimulation objective to estimate rewards for planning (Shimizu & Tomizuka, 2025) (see Appendix A.1). While such a design is important for value approximation or policy transfer, it is not funda-mental for our JEPA. Here the goal is to learn an invariant latent representation that preserves control-relevant transi-tion dynamics rather than task-specific reward structure. Empirically, when a reward predictor is included, Figure 11 shows that the reward distance converges to near zero early in training and provides little additional signal for improving accuracy in the transition dynamics. This suggests that, for the PointMaze task, reward prediction does not contribute beyond what is already captured by the transition dynamics. 

# 6. Discussions and Future Work 

We show that DINO-WM is not robust under background changes and distractors. By enforcing control-relevant in-variance via bisimulation on top of pretrained visual features, we obtain latent embeddings 10 × lower-dimensional than that of DINO-WM that are robust for planning under visual 8Learning Invariant Visual Representations for Planning with JEPAs 

shifts, without reward supervision. We note two key limitations of our work: 1) we assume access to sufficiently informative pretrained visual features. While we show robustness across different self-supervised encoders (Table 2), performance degrades when the visual representations lack semantic structure (i.e., without DI-NOv2), indicating that bisimulation-based invariance cannot compensate for poor visual features. 2) Our theoretical anal-ysis focuses on reward-free bisimulation with goal-reaching costs and yields a horizon-dependent bound. While this aligns with JEPAs, it yields looser bounds than its reward-aware counterpart. Understanding whether O(T ) is funda-mental remains open. Several directions come naturally from this work. First, we can integrate the bisimulation encoder in gradient-based planning (Parthasarathy et al., 2025), which may benefit from smoother and invariant latent dynamics. Another direc-tion is to combine the bisimulation invariance with adaptive policies, enabling online refinement of the invariant repre-sentation as the agent encounters new visual conditions. From a theoretical perspective, extending our analysis to reward-aware bisimulation could clarify the trade-offs be-tween JEPAs’ modularity and tighter generalization bounds. Finally, considering complex manipulation tasks and long-horizon planning problems is under current implementation. 

# Impact Statement 

This work aims to advance robust, task-agnostic visual world models for planning by improving representation learning under visual distribution shifts. There are many potential societal impacts of this work, none of which we feel must be specifically highlighted here. 

# Acknowledgments 

The authors thank Vlad Sobal and Tim G. J. Rudner for instructive discussions on this work. Leonardo F. Toso is funded by the Center for AI and Responsible Financial Innovation (CAIRFI) Fellowship and by the Columbia Pres-idential Fellowship. James Anderson is partially funded by NSF grants ECCS 2144634 and 2231350 and the Columbia Center of AI Technology in collaboration with Amazon. 

# References 

Abate, A. Approximation metrics based on probabilistic bisimulations for general state-space markov processes: a survey. Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Sci-ence , 297:3–25, 2013. Assran, M., Duval, Q., Misra, I., Bojanowski, P., Vincent, P., Rabbat, M., LeCun, Y., and Ballas, N. Self-supervised learning from images with a joint-embedding predictive architecture. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 15619– 15629, 2023. Balestriero, R. and LeCun, Y. Lejepa: Provable and scalable self-supervised learning without the heuristics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.08544 , 2025. Bardes, A., Ponce, J., and LeCun, Y. Vicreg: Variance-invariance-covariance regularization for self-supervised learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.04906 , 2021. Caron, M., Touvron, H., Misra, I., J ´egou, H., Mairal, J., Bojanowski, P., and Joulin, A. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision ,pp. 9650–9660, 2021. Castro, P. and Precup, D. Using bisimulation for policy transfer in mdps. In Proceedings of the AAAI confer-ence on artificial intelligence , volume 24, pp. 1065–1070, 2010. Castro, P. S. Scalable methods for computing state similarity in deterministic markov decision processes. In Proceed-ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,volume 34, pp. 10069–10076, 2020. Castro, P. S., Panangaden, P., and Precup, D. Equivalence relations in fully and partially observable markov decision processes. In IJCAI , volume 9, pp. 1653–1658, 2009. Dosovitskiy, A. An image is worth 16x16 words: Trans-formers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929 , 2020. Ebert, F., Finn, C., Dasari, S., Xie, A., Lee, A., and Levine, S. Visual foresight: Model-based deep reinforcement learning for vision-based robotic control. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.00568 , 2018. Ferns, N., Panangaden, P., and Precup, D. Metrics for finite markov decision processes. In UAI , volume 4, pp. 162– 169, 2004. Ferns, N., Panangaden, P., and Precup, D. Bisimulation metrics for continuous markov decision processes. SIAM Journal on Computing , 40(6):1662–1714, 2011. Fu, J., Kumar, A., Nachum, O., Tucker, G., and Levine, S. D4rl: Datasets for deep data-driven reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.07219 , 2020. Givens, C. R. and Shortt, R. M. A class of wasserstein met-rics for probability distributions. Michigan Mathematical Journal , 31(2):231–240, 1984. Grill, J.-B., Strub, F., Altch ´e, F., Tallec, C., Richemond, P., Buchatskaya, E., Doersch, C., Avila Pires, B., Guo, Z., Gheshlaghi Azar, M., et al. Bootstrap your own latent-a new approach to self-supervised learning. Advances in 

9Learning Invariant Visual Representations for Planning with JEPAs 

neural information processing systems , 33:21271–21284, 2020. Ha, D. and Schmidhuber, J. World models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.10122 , 2(3), 2018. Hafner, D., Lillicrap, T., Fischer, I., Villegas, R., Ha, D., Lee, H., and Davidson, J. Learning latent dynamics for planning from pixels. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 2555–2565. PMLR, 2019. Hafner, D., Lillicrap, T., Ba, J., and Norouzi, M. Dream to control: Learning behaviors by latent imagination. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations ,2020. Hafner, D., Lillicrap, T. P., Norouzi, M., and Ba, J. Mas-tering atari with discrete world models. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. He, K., Chen, X., Xie, S., Li, Y., Doll ´ar, P., and Girshick, R. Masked autoencoders are scalable vision learners. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 16000–16009, 2022. Jiang, D., Liu, Y., Liu, S., Zhao, J., Zhang, H., Gao, Z., Zhang, X., Li, J., and Xiong, H. From clip to dino: Visual encoders shout in multi-modal large language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08825 , 2023. Kemertas, M. and Aumentado-Armstrong, T. Towards ro-bust bisimulation metric learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:4764–4777, 2021. Khorrambakht, R., Ortiz-Haro, J., Amigo, J., Mostafa, O., Dugas, D., Meier, F., and Righetti, L. Worldplanner: Monte carlo tree search and mpc with action-conditioned visual world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.03077 ,2025. Kouvaritakis, B. and Cannon, M. Model predictive control. 

Switzerland: Springer International Publishing , 38(13-56):7, 2016. LeCun, Y. A path towards autonomous machine intelligence version 0.9. 2, 2022-06-27. Open Review , 62(1):1–62, 2022. Lenz, I., Knepper, R. A., and Saxena, A. Deepmpc: Learn-ing deep latent features for model predictive control. In 

Robotics: Science and Systems , volume 10, pp. 25. Rome, Italy, 2015. Matsuo, Y., LeCun, Y., Sahani, M., Precup, D., Silver, D., Sugiyama, M., Uchibe, E., and Morimoto, J. Deep learn-ing, reinforcement learning, and world models. Neural Networks , 152:267–275, 2022. Oquab, M., Darcet, T., Moutakanni, T., Vo, H., Szafraniec, M., Khalidov, V., Fernandez, P., Haziza, D., Massa, F., El-Nouby, A., et al. Dinov2: Learning robust visual features without supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07193 ,2023. Parthasarathy, A., Kalra, N., Agrawal, R., LeCun, Y., Bounou, O., Izmailov, P., and Goldblum, M. Closing the train-test gap in world models for gradient-based plan-ning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.09929 , 2025. Rubinstein, R. Y. and Kroese, D. P. The cross-entropy method: a unified approach to combinatorial optimiza-tion, Monte-Carlo simulation and machine learning .Springer Science & Business Media, 2004. Shadmehr, R. and Mussa-Ivaldi, S. Biological Learning and Control: How the Brain Builds Representations, Predicts Events, and Makes Decisions . The MIT Press, 2012. Shimizu, Y. and Tomizuka, M. Bisimulation metric for model predictive control. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. Sobal, V., SV, J., Jalagam, S., Carion, N., Cho, K., and LeCun, Y. Joint embedding predictive architectures focus on slow features. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.10831 , 2022. Sobal, V., Zhang, W., Cho, K., Balestriero, R., Rudner, T. G., and LeCun, Y. Learning from reward-free offline data: A case for planning with latent dynamics models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.14819 , 2025. Thuruthel, T. G., Falotico, E., Renda, F., and Laschi, C. Model-based reinforcement learning for closed-loop dy-namic control of soft robotic manipulators. IEEE Trans-actions on Robotics , 35(1):124–134, 2018. Tkachev, I. and Abate, A. On infinite-horizon probabilis-tic properties and stochastic bisimulation functions. In 

2011 50th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control and European Control Conference , pp. 526–531. IEEE, 2011. Tobin, J., Fong, R., Ray, A., Schneider, J., Zaremba, W., and Abbeel, P. Domain randomization for transferring deep neural networks from simulation to the real world. In 2017 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems (IROS) , pp. 23–30. IEEE, 2017. Villani, C. et al. Optimal transport: old and new , volume 338. Springer, 2008. Williams, G., Wagener, N., Goldfain, B., Drews, P., Rehg, J. M., Boots, B., and Theodorou, E. A. Information theoretic mpc for model-based reinforcement learning. In 2017 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA) , pp. 1714–1721. IEEE, 2017. 10 Learning Invariant Visual Representations for Planning with JEPAs 

Wu, Z., Zhang, J., Pai, D., Wang, X., Singh, C., Yang, J., Gao, J., and Ma, Y. Simplifying dino via coding rate regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.10385 , 2025. Zhang, A., McAllister, R. T., Calandra, R., Gal, Y., and Levine, S. Learning invariant representations for rein-forcement learning without reconstruction. In Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. Zhou, G., Pan, H., LeCun, Y., and Pinto, L. DINO-WM: World models on pre-trained visual features enable zero-shot planning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. Zhou, J., Wei, C., Wang, H., Shen, W., Xie, C., Yuille, A., and Kong, T. ibot: Image bert pre-training with online tokenizer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.07832 , 2021. Zhu, J., Evtimova, K., Chen, Y., Shwartz-Ziv, R., and Le-Cun, Y. Variance-covariance regularization improves rep-resentation learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.13292 ,2023. 11 Learning Invariant Visual Representations for Planning with JEPAs 

# A. Appendix 

This appendix provides additional details that complement the main text. We include specifics on the architecture and implementation of the proposed bisimulation encoder and transition model, further discussion of the PCA-based variance-covariance regularization, and extended descriptions of the experimental setup, including task configurations, domain randomization, and planning details. We also provide the proofs for the generalization bound in Section 4.6. 

A.1. Model Architecture 

This section provides additional details on the architecture of the proposed joint-embedding predictive world model with bisimulation encoder. A.1.1. O VERVIEW 

The DINO-Bisim model takes visual observations, proprioceptive inputs, and actions at the current timestep and predicts the next bisimulation latent state, along with an optional reward prediction. Visual observations are encoded using a pretrained DINOv2 ViT-S/14 visual encoder (Oquab et al., 2023), followed by a bisimulation encoder implemented as an MLP to produce the latent state. Proprioceptive inputs and actions are embedded using lightweight 1D convolutional encoders. The resulting embeddings are concatenated and processed by a 6-layer transformer to predict the next bisimulation latent state. A separate reward MLP predicts the reward from the latent state, however, this component is not used in our experiments, as discussed in Section 5 and throughout the main text.  

> Figure 5. Overview of the DINO-Bisim architecture.

A.1.2. B ISIMULATION MEMORY BUFFER (R EPLAY BUFFER )Recalling the definition of the bisimulation metric introduced in Section 3.2 and in (Castro, 2020), the corresponding loss involves computing differences between selected pairs of states. Since a single training iteration can only leverage the current batch of 20 states, we introduce a bisimulation memory buffer that stores up to 1000 previously generated states, also following (Zhang et al., 2021). This buffer allows comparisons with a larger and more diverse set of past states, thereby improving the stability and effectiveness of the bisimulation representation learning. A.1.3. P ATCH DESIGN IN BISIMULATION MODEL 

Why Patch-based Design? The bisimulation model adopts a patch-based design, in which visual inputs are partitioned into spatial patches and each patch is encoded independently. This design builds upon the bisimulation encoder in (Shimizu & Tomizuka, 2025) and naturally aligns with the output format of DINOv2 and other patch-based visual encoders. Beyond architectural compatibility, the patch-based formulation substantially reduces the number of trainable parameters, leading to a more compact and efficient model while empirically improving performance. More concretely, an example architecture using the hyperparameters in Table 4 is illustrated in Figure 6. Rather than 12 Learning Invariant Visual Representations for Planning with JEPAs      

> Figure 6. Bisimulation encoder with patch-based design, with 196 of patches and 32 output patch dimension.

flattening a feature map of size 14 × 14 × 384 into a 75264 -dimensional vector as input to the first layer, the patch-based bisimulation encoder performs 196 parallel forward passes using a shared MLP whose input dimension is 384 . As a result, the number of parameters in the first layer is reduced from (75 , 264 ×256)+256 = 19 , 267 , 840 to (384 ×256)+256 = 98 , 560 ,where 256 is the hidden layer dimension, with only negligible additional overhead from the spatial embedding parameters. 

Latent Space Dimensionality Comparison. DINO-WM operates on patch-based visual representations produced by DINOv2, consisting of 196 patches with 384 -dimensional embeddings each, resulting in a latent representation of size 

196 × 384 . In contrast, our patch-based bisimulation encoder preserves the same spatial structure but maps each patch to a low-dimensional latent embedding. This yields a representation of size 196 × 32 . Consequently, our model operates in a latent space that is more than 10 × smaller than that of DINO-WM, while maintaining improved robustness to slow, task-irrelevant features. A.1.4. H YPERPARAMETERS 

We now summarizes the hyperparameters used in our experiments.  

> Table 3. Shared hyperparameters for DINO-Bisim training.

Name Value 

Image size 224 Optimizer AdamW Decoder learning rate 3e −4

Predictor learning rate 1e −5

Action encoder learning rate 1e −4

Bisimulation learning rate 5e −7

Action embedding dim. 10 Proprio embedding dim. 10 Epochs 50 Batch size 20  

> Table 4. Bisimulation encoder hyperparameters.

Name Value 

Bisimulation memory buffer size 1000 Bisimulation state comparison size 200 Action dim. 10 Num patches 196 Latent dim. 32 Patch dim. 32 Patch embedding dim. 384 We list below the main hyperparameters used by the bisimulation encoder and transition model. These parameters control 13 Learning Invariant Visual Representations for Planning with JEPAs 

the dimensionality of the latent representation, the size of the comparison set used for bisimulation representation learning, and the dimensionality of visual and action embeddings. 

Bisimulation Memory Buffer Size and Comparison Size. The capacity of the bisimulation memory buffer and the number of stored latent states used for pairwise comparisons when computing the bisimulation loss. 

Action Dimension ( action dim ). The dimensionality of the encoded action representation, used as input to the reward predictor that is not in use for our experiments. 

Number of Patches ( num patches ). The number of spatial patches output by the bisimulation encoder, matching the patch decomposition of the visual pretrained encoder. 

Latent Dimension ( latent dim ). The dimensionality of the bisimulation latent space for each patch. 

Patch Dimension ( patch dim ). The dimensionality of each patch embedding produced by the bisimulation encoder; in our implementation, this is set equal to latent dim .

Patch Embedding Dimension ( patch emb dim ). The dimensionality of the input patch embeddings provided by the pretrained visual encoder, matching the output dimension of DINOv2. 

A.2. PCA-based Variance Covariance Regularization Setup. Our experiments use DINOv2, SimDINOv2 and iBOT as pretrained visual encoder, which encode background appearance along the dominant principal components (see Section 4.3). As noted in the DINOv2 paper (Oquab et al., 2023), background information can be attenuated by thresholding the first principal component. Consistent with this observation and our illustration in Figures 3 and 8, we make the preliminary assessment that task-irrelevant appearance factors predominantly align with the first principal component direction in the latent feature space. 

Method. The bisimulation encoder is initialized with random parameters and is first trained using the standard VICReg objective for a small number of epochs to stabilize representation learning. We then perform a one-time principal component analysis to identify the dominant direction associated with task-irrelevant variation. After a number of warm-up epochs, we replace the standard VICReg loss with the proposed PCA-based VICReg objective, which helps to suppresses variance along the identified principal component directions. An example training run with a vectorized bisimulation latent representation of dimension 196 × 32 (corresponding to the number of patches and per-patch latent dimensionality), where PCA-based VICReg is enabled after k = 50 epochs, is shown in Figure 7. 

Result. While this staged regularization approach improves the stability of invariant representation learning, we hypothesize that a tighter integration of PCA-based regularization throughout training and planning, rather than a discrete loss swap, could further enhance invariance. Exploring such joint objectives is an interesting direction for future work. 

A.3. Additional Information on the Navigation Task 

This section provides additional details on the simple navigation task used in our experiments, complementing the high-level description in the main text. PointMaze (Fu et al., 2020) is a force-actuated 2-DoF navigation environment in which a ball moves in the Cartesian x–y

plane with the objective of reaching a target location. The agent observes proprioceptive state information and evolves under continuous dynamics that capture velocity, acceleration, and inertia. For a fair comparison, we train all models on 2000 fully random trajectories, matching the data setup in (Zhou et al., 2025). See Figure 9 for a sequence of frames that illustrates the planning from an initial state to a goal state. 

A.4. Planning 

We optimize the action sequence using CEM. At each step, CEM samples multiple candidate action sequences, rolls them out using the learned model, selects the sequences with lowest cost (3) , and updates the sampling distribution accordingly. The first action of the optimized sequence is played, and the process repeats with a receding horizon. Although gradient-based planning methods have recently been proposed and validated in (Parthasarathy et al., 2025) for 14 Learning Invariant Visual Representations for Planning with JEPAs                 

> Figure 7. First two principal components (PCs) of three distinct states (colors) observed under three different backgrounds (marker shapes) for the PointMaze task. The goal of the bisimulation encoder is to map identical states across backgrounds to nearby latent representations.
> Left. DINOv2 embeddings zt=fθ(ot)show strong separation along the first PC for identical states under different backgrounds, indicating that background variation dominates the leading principal direction. Middle. Bisimulation embeddings wt=hη(zt)after 50 epochs with standard VICReg still exhibit separation along the first PC, preserving background-dependent variation. Right. Bisimulation embeddings after 90 epochs with PCA-based VICReg (activated at epoch 50) show improved clustering of identical states across backgrounds, consistent with suppression of task-irrelevant variation.

DINO-WM, we focus on CEM for fair comparison with DINO-WM (Zhou et al., 2025). 

A.5. Domain Randomization for the PointMaze Task 

To evaluate robustness through data augmentation, we apply domain randomization to the PointMaze task by modifying the visual appearance of the environment during training. In particular, 40% of the training data are rendered with randomized visual backgrounds, while the remaining trajectories retain the default appearance. The randomization includes background color changes and gradient-based background modifications, as illustrated in Figure 10. To avoid introducing spurious temporal artifacts that could make the transition dynamics learning harder, the randomized background is kept fixed within each trajectory but varies across different trajectories. Importantly, these visual modifications do not alter the underlying environment dynamics, agent behavior, or goal locations, ensuring that domain randomization affects only task-irrelevant visual features. 

A.6. Reward-aware Bisimulation Encoder: Training Metrics 

Let us now analyze the training dynamics of the reward-aware bisimulation encoder to assess the contribution of the reward prediction term relative to the transition-based objectives. Following prior work on bisimulation-based MPC (Shimizu & Tomizuka, 2025), we include an auxiliary reward predictor during training, although it is not used for training nor planning in our experiments.  

> Figure 11. Training losses value versus the training epochs.

Figure 11 reports the evolution of the main loss compo-nents throughout training. We observe that the reward prediction loss rapidly converges to near zero early in training and remains negligible afterwards. This indicates that, for the navigation task considered, reward prediction provides little additional learning signal beyond what is already captured by the transition dynamics. As a result, the reward term has a negligible influence on the learned latent representation. 15 Learning Invariant Visual Representations for Planning with JEPAs   

> Figure 8. First twp principal components (PC1 and PC2) of latent embeddings produced by DINOv2, SimDINOv2, and iBOT for a PointMaze observation. In all cases, PC1 captures a large percentage of the total variance that predominantly encodes background and layout information rather than control-relevant features.
> Figure 9. PointMaze task, from leftmost the initial state to the rightmost the goal state

On the other hand, the transition losses and representation regularization terms (including the VICReg and bisimu-lation objectives) remain active throughout training and dominate the optimization process. These components are responsible for making the latent space to preserve control-relevant dynamics while suppressing task-irrelevant visual features. This empirical observation supports the design choice adopted in the main experiments, where we drop the reward prediction term and rely only on transition-based bisimulation to enforce invariance. 

A.7. Moving Distractors 

To evaluate robustness to dynamic but task-irrelevant visual variations, we consider two moving distractors in the PointMaze task. As illustrated in Figure 10, we augment the environment with colored distractor objects (yellow and magenta dots) that move continuously within the maze while remaining decoupled from the agent dynamics and task objectives. The distractors introduce persistent motion that can dominate DINO-WM latent dynamics, despite being irrelevant for control. On the other hand our bisimulation-based representation is designed to suppress such task-irrelevant motion by enforcing equivalence between states that exhibit identical on-policy transition behavior. As a result, planning performance remains stable in the presence of moving distractors, whereas DINO-WM tend to drop in performance. 

A.8. Reward-Free Generalization Bound: Proof of Theorem 4.1 

We first provide an auxiliary lemma regarding the 1-Wasserstein distance which we use in the proof of Theorem 4.1. 

Lemma A.1 (Kantorovich-Rubinstein duality (Villani et al., 2008)) . Let μ, and ν be two probability measures on the metric space (Ω , d π ), then 

W1(μ, ν ) = sup  

> ∥f∥L≤1

(Ex∼μ[f (x)] − Ey∼ν [f (y)]) , (4) 16 Learning Invariant Visual Representations for Planning with JEPAs 

Figure 10. Examples of domain-randomized visual observations for the PointMaze task. During training, background appearance is randomized across trajectories using color shifts, gradient backgrounds, and fixed distractors (i.e., the dot outside the maze) while the underlying maze layout and transition dynamics remain unchanged. 

Figure 12. Moving distractor setting in PointMaze. Yellow and magenta dots move continuously within the maze, introducing dynamic but task-irrelevant visual variation while preserving the underlying transition dynamics. 

where ∥ · ∥ L is the Lipschitz norm (i.e., ∥f ∥L ≤ sup x̸=y   

> |f(x)−f(y)||x−y|

). 

We will later invoke the auxiliary result above in the proofs of Theorem 4.1. To make this step explicit, we first show how the Kantorovich-Rubinstein duality implies a Lipschitz-based bound on differences of expectations. Let μ ≜ Pπ (· | 

z), and ν ≜ Pπ (· | z′), be two probability measures on the metric space (Ω , d π ), and define a scalar-valued function s(˜ z)

on the latent space z. Assuming that s(z) is a L-Lipschitz with respect to dπ , i.e., 

|s(u) − s(v)| ≤ Ld π (u, v ), ∀u, v ∈ Ω.

By Kantorovich-Rubinstein duality (Lemma A.1), we have 

W1(μ, ν ) = sup  

> ∥f∥L≤1

(Ex∼μ[f (x)] − Ey∼ν [f (y)]) ,

where ∥f ∥L ≤ 1 denotes that f is 1-Lipschitz with respect to dπ . Now define the rescaled function l(·) ≜ 1 

> L

s(·). Then l is 

1-Lipschitz since, for all u, v ∈ Ω, we have 

|l(u) − l(v)| = 1

L |s(u) − s(v)| ≤ 1

L Ld π (u, v ) = dπ (u, v ).

Thus l is feasible for the supremum in (4), implying that 

W1(μ, ν ) ≥ Ex∼μ[l(x)] − Ey∼ν [l(y)] = 1

L (Ex∼μ[s(x)] − Ey∼Q[s(y)]) .

17 Learning Invariant Visual Representations for Planning with JEPAs 

Rearranging the terms, we obtain 

Ex∼μ[s(x)] − Ey∼ν [s(y)] ≤ LW 1(μ, ν ). (5) 

Proof of Theorem 4.1: We begin the proof by first noticing that the goal-reaching cost used for planning is Lipschitz on the bounded set of bisimulation latent states, i.e., {w : ∥w∥2 ≤ Hw}. Indeed, for any w, w ′ with ∥w∥2, ∥w′∥2, ∥wg ∥2 ≤ Hw,we have the following expression 

|c(w) − c(w′)| = ∥w − wg ∥22 − ∥ w′ − wg ∥22

= |⟨ w − w′, w + w′ − 2wg ⟩| ≤ ∥ w − w′∥2∥w + w′ − 2wg ∥2 (Cauchy–Schwarz inequality) 

≤ 4Hw∥w − w′∥2, (6) so c(w) is 4Hw-Lipschitz. We further write the recursion 

JπT (z) = c (hη (z)) + γE˜z∼Pπ (·| z)

JπT −1(˜ z) , (7) where we assume that Jπ 

> 0

(z) ≡ 0.We then prove by induction that JπT is LT -Lipschitz with respect to dπ (z, z ′), with LT ≜ 8HwT , which implies ( ?? ). For T = 0 it holds trivially. Assume it holds for T − 1. Then for any z, z ′,

|JπT (z) − JπT (z′)| ≤ | c (hη (z)) − c (hη (z′)) | + γ E˜z∼Pπ (·| z)JπT −1(˜ z) − E˜z′∼Pπ (·| z′)JπT −1(˜ z′) .

Note that the first term is bounded by the quantity 4Hw∥hη (z) − hη (z′)∥2. On the other hand, for the second term, since JπT −1 is LT −1-Lipschitz with respect to dπ (z, z ′), we can use Kantorovich-Rubinstein duality to bound 

E˜z∼Pπ (·| z)JπT −1(˜ z) − E˜z′∼Pπ (·| z′)JπT −1(˜ z′) by LT −1W1 (Pπ (· | z), P π (· | z′)) , i.e., by using (5). Using the definition of the bisimulation metric, with the reward term dropped, we have W1 (Pπ (· | z), P π (· | z′)) = 

γ−1dπ (z, z ′). Therefore, we obtain 

|JπT (z) − JπT (z′)| ≤ 4Hw∥hη (z) − hη (z′)∥2 + LT −1dπ (z, z ′).

As we assume that ∥hη (z) − hη (z′)∥2 ≤ dπ (z, z ′) + ε, then 

|JπT (z) − JπT (z′)| ≤ (4 Hw + LT −1) dπ (z, z ′) + 4 Hwε. (8) Unrolling the recursion and assuming that ϵ is sufficiently small, i.e., ϵ ≤ dπ (z, z ′), then LT ≜ 8HwT , which implies the bound as stated in Theorem 4.1. 18