Title: LeRobot: An Open-Source Library for End-to-End Robot Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.22818v1

Published Time: Fri, 27 Feb 2026 01:51:30 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

# LEROBOT : A N OPEN -S OURCE LIBRARY FOR 

# END -TO -E ND ROBOT LEARNING 

Remi Cadene *

Hugging Face 

Simon Aliberts *

Hugging Face 

Francesco Capuano * † 

University of Oxford 

Michel Aractingi *

Hugging Face 

Adil Zouitine *

Hugging Face 

Pepijn Kooijmans *

Hugging Face 

Jade Choghari *

Hugging Face 

Martino Russi *

Hugging Face 

Caroline Pascal *

Hugging Face 

Steven Palma *

Hugging Face 

Mustafa Shukor *

Hugging Face 

Jess Moss *

Hugging Face 

Alexander Soare *

Hugging Face 

Dana Aubakirova *

Hugging Face 

Quentin Lhoest 

Hugging Face 

Quentin Gallouédec 

Hugging Face 

Thomas Wolf 

Hugging Face 

# ABSTRACT 

Robotics is undergoing a significant transformation powered by advances in high-level control techniques based on machine learning, giving rise to the field of robot learning. Recent progress in robot learning has been accelerated by the increas-ing availability of affordable teleoperation systems, large-scale openly available datasets, and scalable learning-based methods. However, development in the field of robot learning is often slowed by fragmented, closed-source tools designed to only address specific sub-components within the robotics stack. In this pa-per, we present lerobot , an open-source library that integrates across the entire robot learning stack, from low-level middleware communication for motor con-trols to large-scale dataset collection, storage and streaming. The library is de-signed with a strong focus on real-world robotics, supporting accessible hardware platforms while remaining extensible to new embodiments. It also supports effi-cient implementations for various state-of-the-art robot learning algorithms from multiple prominent paradigms, as well as a generalized asynchronous inference stack. Unlike traditional pipelines which heavily rely on hand-crafted techniques, 

lerobot emphasizes scalable learning approaches that improve directly with more data and compute. Designed for accessibility, scalability, and openness, 

lerobot lowers the barrier to entry for researchers and practitioners to robotics while providing a platform for reproducible, state-of-the-art robot learning. 

# 1 INTRODUCTION 

Early successes in robotics relied on the precise description of robot-environment interactions, typi-cally consisting in analytical descriptions of rigid-body kinematics, contact modeling, and planning under uncertainty ( explicit models ). While effective in controlled settings, deriving accurate models for diverse deployment scenarios is difficult and error-prone, often requiring substantial expert effort and thus has limited scalability. Recent advances in Machine Learning (ML) have catalyzed a shift toward tackling robotics problems with implicit models , typically learned rather than formulated. A key advantage of learning-based methods ( implicit models ) is their scalability: performance em-pirically improves with larger datasets, and more compute. In turn, the shift from explicit to implicit models promises to address many of the challenges holding robotics back: rather than hand-tuning the different components of a typical robotics pipeline, robot learning algorithms learn monolithic 

> *

Core team. † Work done while at Hugging Face. 

1

> arXiv:2602.22818v1 [cs.RO] 26 Feb 2026

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

Figure 1: lerobot is an open-source library for end-to-end robot learning. It covers the entire stack, from middleware motor interfaces to large-scale data collection and dataset streaming, sup-porting an optimized inference stack, scalable implementations of SOTA robot learning algorithms, and providing support for training custom models as well as easily reusing pre-trained ones. control policies end-to-end, adapting to different input modalities and typically improve with in-creasing quantities of data, echoing broader trends in vision, language, and multimodal learning. Despite this momentum, the robot learning ecosystem is fragmented as (1) high-to-low level control interfaces ( middleware ) are often tailored to specific robots and difficult to adapt, and (2) datasets lack common formats and tooling, resulting in robot and task-specific contributions that are difficult to reproduce and use in practice. lerobot is an open-source library providing a unified, end-to-end stack for robot learning, and it is vertically integrated across the stack featuring: • Unified robot integration. A consistent, Python-based middleware API for real-world motor control across diverse platforms, bridging typical ML frameworks and real-world robotics across a variety of robots, ranging from low-end manipulators to humanoid arms and hands. • Standardized datasets. An efficient, multimodal format for recording, storing, and streaming high frame-rate sensory and image data via LeRobotDataset , a custom dataset format built for scale. With seamless integration into the open-source ecosystem, 

LeRobotDataset encourages openness and research reproducibility. • Optimized inference. An optimized inference stack that decouples action planning from control execution both (1) physically and (2) logically, enabling policies to (1) run on sep-arate machines with increased computational resources compared to those onboard robots, and (2) in parallel with low-level control loops, for robust deployment and dynamic adapt-ability at runtime. • Efficient, reusable algorithms. Clean, PyTorch-based implementations of state-of-the-art (SOTA) robot learning methods, optimized for (1) training custom models from scratch and (2) using openly-available pre-trained models. Together, these components address fragmentation issues in the field, reducing the barrier to entry for robotics by providing vertical integration across the entire robot learning stack, with a clear emphasis on accessibility and scalability, aiming at accelerating progress in the field. 

# 2 BACKGROUND 

2.1 EXPLICIT AND IMPLICIT MODELS 

Autonomous motion leverages either explicit or implicit models (Bekris et al., 2024). Classical robotics historically uses explicit models , implemented as modular pipelines for perception, plan-ning, and control (Siciliano & Khatib, 2016). This approach suffers from compounding errors, poor scalability to diverse deployment scenarios, and undermodeling issues due to simplified analytical models of physical interactions, limiting its effectiveness to unstructured, dynamic environments (e.g., a house versus a factory line). In contrast, robot learning relies on implicit models to develop monolithic, data-driven policies directly mapping observations to action. Robot learning also priori-2Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

Figure 3: Classical robotics uses modular, model-based pipelines with hand-crafted features, while robot learning employs monolithic, data-driven policies that learn directly from interaction data. 

Figure 4: (A) Low-cost, open-source robots like SO-10X and ALOHA cost a fraction of proprietary industrial arms, using consumer-grade parts and 3D-printable designs. (B) Decentralized efforts to collect expert demonstrations in the form of trajectories surpassed centralized efforts for the collec-tion of large amounts of real-world robotics data. tizes interaction data over rigid assumptions, and replaces hand-engineered components with learned representations, offering a more robust and adaptable solution for unstructured environments. 

Figure 2: Some of the explicit and implicit models for autonomous motion. The adaptability of these learned, implicit models stems directly from their scalability with data—a primary advantage over classical ap-proaches. In this context, real-world robotics data is often collected in the form of expert demonstrations via teleoperation , a process where 

“cognitive decisions are made by [a] human user, while the robot is responsible for their mechanical implementation” (Siciliano & Khatib, 2016, Ch.43, §1). In recent years, teleoperation hardware has become in-creasingly affordable, making it more and more relevant for robot learn-ing, either by teleoperating in virtual reality (VR) or in the real world. Consumer-grade VR teleoperation headsets for robotics have been used to collect robot data both on real-world and simulated robots (Bjorck et al., 2025), and low-cost teleoperated robotic arms (Zhao et al., 2023; Aldaco et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024; Knight et al., 2024) are increasingly empowering researchers and practitioners to collect real-world robotics data. In turn, this results in a multiplication of centralized (Brohan et al., 2023; Collaboration et al., 2025; Khazatsky et al., 2025) and de-centralized (Section 3.2) efforts to collect robot data. Figure 4 shows how fully accessible teleoperated platforms such as the SO-100, SO-101 (jointly referred to as SO-10X, (Knight et al., 2024)) and ALOHA-2 (Aldaco et al., 2024) can cost down to a fraction of closed-source, industrial-grade robots such as the Franka Emika Panda arm. Consequently, these low end robot platforms can be used to collect large amounts of data in a decentralized effort powered by the very accessibility—low-cost, open designs, 3D-printable parts—of these low-end robot platforms. 3Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 2.2 ROBOT LEARNING 

Reinforcement Learning Reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) has been ex-tensively applied to robotics (Kober et al., 2013), for the inherently sequential nature of control problems and Deep RL’s capability to learn strategies for return maximization max π J(π) =max π Eτ ∼π

 P Tt=0 γtrt

 directly from highly-dimensional, unstructured observations such as images (Mnih et al., 2013). Off-policy, entropy-regularized methods such as Soft Actor Critic (Haarnoja et al., 2018) can be adapted to exploit teleoperation data and safely train in the real-world, thereby sidestepping concerns related to operative safety and simulation-induced dis-crepancies. Reinforcement Learning with Prior Data (RLPD) (Ball et al., 2023) mixes offline and online buffers without pretraining to speed up convergence, and in conjuction with (1) learned re-ward classifiers overcoming the need to define brittle hand-crafted rewards (Luo et al., 2025) and (2) targeted human interventions during training, can yield near-perfect success rates in challenging manipulation tasks within 1-2 hours of real-world training (HIL-SERL, Luo et al. (2024)). 

Imitation Learning Imitation Learning via Behavioral Cloning (BC) offers a pragmatic alterna-tive to real-world RL by learning control directly from human demonstrations, eliminating the need for reward design and reducing exploration risk by learning to reproduce the behavior of an expert demonstrator (Pomerleau, 1988). Collected via teleoperation on increasingly affordable hardware, large corpora of robotics data also enable training at a scale across tasks and embodiments (Collab-oration et al., 2025; Khazatsky et al., 2025). BC relies on learning generative models of the joint (or conditional) distribution over state-action pairs p : S × A 7 → [0 , 1] , p (a, s ) (or p(a|s)) to learn from data distributions exhibiting multiple modes, such as teleoperation data (Florence et al., 2022). Recent works in BC thus employ powerful generative models to learn the conditional distribution 

p(a|s), learning from multimodal demonstrations and produce coherent action sequences: Zhao et al. (2023) leverages (conditional) Variational Auto-Encoders (Kingma & Welling, 2022; Sohn et al., 2015), Chi et al. (2024) relies on Diffusion Models (Ho et al., 2020) whereas Black et al. (2024); Shukor et al. (2025) both rely on Flow Matching (Lipman et al., 2023). Inspired by successes in developing foundation models for vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) and language (OpenAI, 2024), BC is also increasingly being used in efforts aiming to develop robot foundation models (Jang et al., 2022; Brohan et al., 2023; Black et al., 2024), scaling up both data and compute used to learn visuo-motor policies suitable for real-world deployment across tasks and even robot embodiments. Robot learning algorithms are often implemented as standalone components and their integration with the rest of the robotics stack remains challenging. 2.3 PRACTICAL CHALLENGES FOR ROBOT LEARNING RESEARCH 

Despite scientific advances, the robot learning ecosystem remains fragmented, impeding repro-ducibility and raising the barrier to entry for research. • Disaggregated Middleware: While middleware abstractions are available, it is common to encounter middleware components tailored to specific platforms in practice. This het-erogeneity often forces teams to develop bespoke adaptations, siloing efforts. • Datasets and Formats: Large-scale datasets are typically shared in a different formats. Data is often released in varied formats like TensorFlow Datasets, ROS bags, or bespoke JSON layouts. The absence of a universal, modality-rich schema prevents the seamless aggregation of disparate datasets into larger mixtures. • Learning Frameworks: The deep learning literature has consistently demonstrated that minor implementation differences in algorithms, data handling, and evaluation pipelines can lead to significant variance in results (Henderson et al., 2018). In robotics, these issues are compounded by hardware variability, further hindering reproducibility. This ecosystem-wide fragmentation imposes significant incidental complexity on researchers, di-verting resources from core scientific inquiry to systems integration. lerobot addresses these limitations by providing an end-to-end, open, and scalable library designed to unify hardware in-terfacing, collecting and streaming data, and training and deploying advanced policies with minimal engineering overhead. 4Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Robot Type Cost (C) SO-100/101 Manipulator (Bimanual) ∼ 225 (550) Koch-v1.1 Manipulator (Bimanual) ∼ 670 (1346) ALOHA Bimanual Manipulator ∼ 21k HopeJR-Arm Humanoid Arm and hand ∼ 500 LeKiwi Mobile Manipulator ∼ 230                                

> (a) Cost for all robot platforms supported by
> lerobot and with an openly-available Bill Of Mate-rials (BOM).
> Robot # Downloads # Datasets # Episodes
> Panda 1’878’395 588 926’776 xArm 1’107’329 74 450’329 WidowX 832’177 100 214’117 KUKA 662’550 3419784 SO-101 319’586 3’965 58’299 SO-100 278’697 5’161 78’510 Koch-v1.1 43’561 849 20’959
> (b) All Top-4 robots for number of downloads, datasets and episodes openly shared, listed in decreasing order by the total number of downloads.

# 3 FEATURES 

lerobot is designed for accessibility, scalability, and reproducibility in robot learning. The library natively integrates (1) entirely open-source hardware platforms costing a fraction of closed-source devices, (2) a unified middleware shared across low-level robot interfaces (3) data collection, storage and streaming tools, (4) an optimized inference engine and (5) many ready-to-use implementations of SOTA methods in robot learning, useful to both train models from scratch and re-use openly available pre-trained models. lerobot is entirely open-source, and highly accessible due to its reliance on low-cost teleoperation kits, focus on empowering large-scale datasets via streaming, and simple interface to adopt models in fully reproducible pipelines. 3.1 ACCESSIBLE REAL -WORLD ROBOTS 

lerobot currently supports multiple real-world robot platforms for both static and mobile manipu-lation. The library fully integrates the SO-100 and SO-101 arms (Knight et al., 2024), both in a single and bimanual setup. The library also supports the Koch-v1.1 (Moss, 2025) and ALOHA-2 (Aldaco et al., 2024) manipulators, the Hope-JR humanoid arm (TheRobotStudio, 2025), the Stretch-3 (Hello Robot, 2025) and LeKiwi (SIGRobotics-UIUC, 2025) mobile manipulation platforms, and lastly the Reachy-2 humanoid (Mick et al., 2019). lerobot is designed to interface multiple open devices with a shared middleware that can be used to (1) read the configuration on a leader robot and write it on follower robot for teleoperation and (2) directly control the follower with a learned policy. Table 1a shows the cost for all the robot platforms currently supported by lerobot with an openly-available Bill of Materials (BOM), reported for completeness in Appendix A. lerobot can support multiple robot platforms thanks to a shared middleware embedded in higher-level abstractions for the different robots supported, and engineered to interface directly with the low-level SDKs of major low-cost actuator producers (FeeTech and Dynamixel). Crucially, the middleware is designed to be easily extensible and highly composable. We refer to Appendix B for an example of teleoperation using lerobot .3.2 DATASETS 

To address the fragmented nature of data in robotics research, we introduce LeRobotDataset ,

lerobot ’s unified multimodal dataset schema. This standardized format is engineered to pro-vide convenient and standardized access to robotics data spanning diverse modalities, including high-frequency sensorimotor readings, multiple camera feeds, and teleoperation status signals. The schema is designed to be self-contained, accommodating general metadata such as textual descrip-tions of the demonstrated tasks for filtering and language-conditioned policies, specifics of the robot embodiment considered, and relevant experimental parameters such as frames-per-second (FPS) of data capture and the types sensors used. As of September 2025, 16K+ datasets from 2.2K+ indi-vidual contributors are openly shared via the LeRobotDataset format, featuring robots directly integrated in the library such as the SO-10X arm and unsupported robots (Franka Emika Panda, xArm, R1Pro), ported to the LeRobotDataset format by the open-source community. We argue the support of different robot configuration underscores the flexibility of our dataset format, and that the coexistence of both large-scale academic benchmarks and small-scale data collection efforts exemplifies the breadth of use-cases that our dataset format can accomodate. 5Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026    

> (a) Downloads over time by robot type (b) Share of downloads by robot type
> (c) Datasets over time by robot type (d) Share of datasets by robot type
> (e) Episodes over time by robot type (f) Share of episodes by robot type

Figure 5: Numbers and trends of downloads, datasets, and episodes by robot type over time. The number of episodes in each dataset has been explicitly tracked starting in October 2024 only. For completeness, we report the top-5 robots grouped in Other , for each of the metrics considered, in Table 4. Open datasets are available for downloads, and Figure 5a shows the evolution of the number of downloads over time, with a breakdown of the share of downloads per robot type (Table 1b) and per robot type over time (Figure 5b, see Appendix C for further details). Despite lerobot only supporting a limited number of robots (grouped under the Other tag in Figure 5a and Figure 5e), datasets collected for other platforms such as the Franka Emika Panda and xArm lead in the num-ber of downloads and size of the datasets collected (Figure 5e). We argue this follows from these platforms being often featured in research-oriented centralized data collection efforts (Collaboration et al., 2025; Khazatsky et al., 2025). Conversely, platforms such as the SO-10X are increasingly fea-tured in small-scale decentralized community efforts powered by the accessibility of (1) the hard-ware platforms used and (2) LeRobotDataset format, with 50%+ of the datasets contributed being collected directly on the SO-10X platforms (Figure 5d). A primary design principle of the dataset format is scalability. The dataset architecture is opti-mized to handle large-scale repositories potentially containing millions of expert trajectories. This unified interface for multi-modal, sequential data is designed for seamless integration with the Py-Torch ecosystem, further promoting standardized and repeatable research workflows. This design 6Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Peak Memory 

# Params CPU MPS RTX 4090 A100 

ACT 52M 817.4MB 462MB 211.24 MB 211.24 MB Diffusion Policy 263M 1.22GB 224MB 1.12 GB 1.12 GB 

π0 3.5B 4.13GB 97MB 13.32 GB 13.32 GB SmolVLA 450M 1.69GB 555MB 1.75 GB 1.75 GB Table 2: Peak memory consumption of policy models currently supported by lerobot . All models are run in full precision (fp32). Diffusion and Flow Models are run with 10 denoising steps at inference. All models maintain their original outputs shapes. is complemented by a native streaming capability designed to enhance accessibility: users can pro-cess remotely-hosted large-scale datasets without the prerequisite of downloading the entire corpus, thereby lowering barriers to entry for the broader community and improving on the accessibility of robot learning research. See Appendix C for more details on streaming.                                              

> 1from lerobot.datasets.lerobot_dataset import LeRobotDataset
> 2from lerobot.datasets.streaming_dataset import StreamingLeRobotDataset
> 34repo_id ="lerobot/svla_so101_pickplace"
> 5#Downloads the whole dataset and loads it in memory
> 6#(allowing for random access)
> 7dataset =LeRobotDataset(repo_id)
> 89#Streams frames on the fly without downloading
> 10 #(access frames sequentially, .next())
> 11 dataset =StreamingLeRobotDataset(repo_id)

3.3 MODELS 

Figure 6: The different robot learning algorithms currently supported by lerobot .

lerobot supports reference implementation for multiple SOTA robot learning algorithms, providing useful baselines for ex-perimentation and accessible models across RL, such as HIL-SERL (Luo et al., 2024) and TD-MPC (Hansen et al., 2022) and BC, both for single-task ACT (Zhao et al., 2023), Diffusion Pol-icy (Chi et al., 2024) and VQ-BET (Lee et al., 2024), and multi-task models such as π0 (Black et al., 2024) and SmolVLA (Shukor et al., 2025) (Figure 6). 

lerobot offers support for custom models too, grouped together under the Other tag in Figure 7. All the control policies imple-mented in lerobot are written in pure Pytorch (Paszke et al., 2019), and integrated with the library to allow (1) training models from scratch on datasets collected via real-world demonstrations, and (2) inference using openly available pre-trained models. The library is designed to for high accessibility, providing a composable set of recipes which can be used to train a model from scratch in less than 100 lines-of-code (LOC), and serve models in less than 40 LOC (Appendix D). In its effort to foster accessibility, lerobot supports multiple models with different computational constraints, ranging from lightweight single-task models to larger, multi-task models. ACT (Zhao et al., 2023) is a particularly popular model dominating the number of uploads (Figure 7a), con-sistenly ranking as one of the most popular policies trained (Figure 7b) and used (Figure 7d). We ascribe the popularity of ACT to (1) its small size and fast inference speed and (2) straightforward ap-plication to limited amount of real-world demonstrations, allowing users to obtain well-performing policies with as little as 50 real-world trajectories. As a single-task model, however, ACT necessi-tates retraining whenever changes in the experimental conditions occur. SmolVLA (Shukor et al., 2025) is a powerful, small-scale Vision-Language-Action model which allows to control real-world robots via language conditioning, resulting in an overall wider applicability to practical scenarios. 7Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Avg Inference Latency (ms) 

# Params CPU MPS RTX 4090 A100 

ACT 52M 182.313 ± 40.82 42.667 ± 10.085 5.013 ± 0.061 13.77 ± 0.445 Diffusion Policy 263M (100%) 3453.838 ± 39.271 369.788 ± 0.193 613.893 ± 10.173 

π0 3.5B (100%) (100%) 209.381 ± 2.762 568.978 ± 2.937 SmolVLA 450M 2028.461 ± 302.59 (2%) 721.826 ± 57.748 99.244 ± 1.195 278.833 ± 1.886 Table 3: Average and standard deviation inference latency over 100 forward passes for policy models currently supported by lerobot. Diffusion and Flow Models are run with 10 denoising steps at inference time. (x%) indicates the percentage of samples that timed-out before the 5000ms hard stop (0% omitted). Table 2 and Table 3 report the peak memory footprint and the average inference latency, measured over 100 test samples, for the most widely used policies supported by lerobot . Evaluations were conducted on four platforms: (1) a MacBook Pro M1 (2021, 16GB, CPU only), (2) the same Mac-Book Pro with the MPS backend, (3) an NVIDIA RTX 4090, and (4) an NVIDIA A100. All models were executed in full fp32 precision at runtime, with inference timed-out after 5 seconds. Over-all, peak memory footprints largely align with theoretical estimates obtained from the combination of model parameter count and numerical precision. The main exceptions are the CPU and MPS backends, where unified memory and frequent offloading to swap introduce variability, obscuring direct performance comparisons and increasing latency. Latency measurements are averaged across all non—timed-out trials, with both mean and standard deviation reported in Table 3. Smaller, task-specific models such as ACT exhibit high efficiency on accelerated backends like MPS and achieve inference rates of ∼100-200Hz on high-end GPUs such as the RTX 4090 and A100. Crucially, larger models such as π0 require substantially longer per each forward passes on average on all plat-forms, and even fail to complete inference within the 5s limit on lower-tier devices, underscoring the challenges in deploying robotics foundation models in practice. 3.4 INFERENCE 

lerobot defines a custom inference stack which is designed to decouple action prediction ( in-ference ) from action execution ( control ), at both the physical and logical level (Figure 8). This optimized stack is designed for modern robot learning policies, increasingly predicting sequences of actions ( action chunks , at:t+H−1, (Zhao et al., 2023)) rather than single controls. All the BC policies supported by lerobot predict action chunks. 

Physical decoupling allows inference to run on a remote machine connected over the network to the robot’s low-level controller. This design enables the use of higher-end computational resources than those typically available aboard a robot for inference, while control is maintained at the de-sired control frequency stepping through the multiple actions received. Further, logical decoupling implements inference via an asynchronous producer-consumer scheme: the inference process pre-dicts action sequences with a look-ahead horizon H in parallel with environment control, which consumes actions at a fixed control rate. Overlapping predictions are merged via a generalized ag-gregation function f , which users can easily specify for their own use cases, ensuring a non-empty action queue and preventing idleness of the robot by overlaying action prediction and action execu-tion. We refer to Appendix E for more details on the performance of decoupled inference. 

# 4 SIMULATION 

While the core focus of lerobot is to lower the barrier to entry to enable real-world robotics appli-cations, lerobot does also support different simulation environments for benchmarking purposes. In practice, simulation proves challenging for the kind of contact-rich, complex tasks lerobot tar-gets. This justifies the library’s choice to train as much as possible on real-world data, relying on simulation primarily for the systematic evaluation of robot learning algorithms. To enable this, we 8Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026   

> (a) Models uploaded over time by policy type. (b) Share of the models uploaded over time by policy type.
> (c) Models downloaded over time by policy type. (d) Share of models downloaded over time by policy type.

Figure 7: Numbers and trends of uploads and downloads of robot learning models by policy type over time. TD-MPC (Hansen et al., 2022), HIL-SERL (Luo et al., 2024) and VQ-BET (Lee et al., 2024) are absent from all visualizations as they are not typically uploaded by users. 

Figure 8: Overview of the generalized inference schema supported by lerobot , whereby a remote server can be used to host compute-expensive policies for inference, while the robot client receives a stream of the actions chunks to enact. The schema provides scalability and flexibility through the possibility to fully customize the function f used to aggregate overlapping chunks. provide evaluation support via the lerobot API for both LIBERO (Liu et al., 2023) and Meta-World (Yu et al., 2020), two popular simulation environments that are often used as benchmarks for robot learning research (Black et al., 2024; Shukor et al., 2025). 

LIBERO While developed to specifically assess the life-long learning capabilities of generic au-tonomous agents, LIBERO is also used in robot learning research as a benchmark to demonstrate 9Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 the adaptability and performance of novel methods, e.g. in manipulation settings (Black et al., 2024; Shukor et al., 2025). While accomodating for procedural task generation, LIBERO proposes four fixed task suites with 10 tasks each researchers can benchmark on. Task suits are developed to quantify the amount of information that is shared under different conditions in terms of spatial ar-rangement (LIBERO-S PATIAL ), object considerd (LIBERO-O BJECT ), and overall task variations (LIBERO-G OAL ). LIBERO does also provide a benchmark for continuing, short (LIBERO-90) and long-horizon (LIBERO-L ONG ) tasks requiring the transfer of entangled knowledge between the aforementioned sources of variation. Typical LIBERO evaluation protocols report the success rate over a number of test episodes, and lerobot natively integrates LIBERO. 

Meta-World Similarly to LIBERO, Meta-World was first developed as a benchmark for assess-ing the performance of generic autonomous systems, with a particular focus on fast adaptation to novel scenarios via meta-learning. Adapting quickly to novel scenarios is a particularly promis-ing area of research in the field of robotics, as it holds the premise of enabling the development of systems that can effectively generalize to unseen tasks leveraging previously acquired information. The Meta-World benchmark consists of 50 distinct robotic manipulation tasks that can be combined into different benchmark suites. The benchmark is structured to quantify performance under dif-ferent learning regimes: multi-task learning (MT10, MT50) where the agent learns multiple tasks simultaneously with access to a task identifier, and meta-learning (ML1, ML10, ML45) which as-sesses the agent’s ability to adapt to new tasks using minimal data. All 50 different tasks require the same robotic arm in the same setup to interact with multiple objects with different shapes and diverse uses. Critically, all the high-level tasks presented in Meta-World require the robot to execute a combination of fixed, more fundamental skills such as reaching for an object or manipulating it. Such a common task conceptual structure proves instrumental in providing a shared interface for autonomous agents to use and learn how to transfer knowledge across different tasks: a key property of the adaptability that is required of modern robot policies (Black et al., 2024; Shukor et al., 2025). 

# 5 CONCLUSIONS 

In this work we introduced lerobot , a unified, open-source stack for end-to-end robot learning that bridges low-level control, large-scale data tooling, and scalable learning algorithms. We showed how accessible teleoperation of multiple real-world robot through a shared middleware can be used to collect real-world data across a variety of robot platforms. Further, we illustrated how standardized datasets can be exploited to collect and reuse data at scale, powering advancements in robot learning thanks to the thousands of datasets collected, resulting in hundreds of thousands of episodic data, and hundreds of models openly contributed by the robot learning community. 

Limitations We identify several limitations remaining in our contribution. First, robots coverage is currently far from exhaustive, as we support a practical but incomplete set of arms, grippers, sen-sors, and controllers. Over the course of 2025, lerobot went from supporting 3 manipulation setups (Koch-v1.1, SO-100, ALOHA) to the 8 regular, humanoid and mobile manipulators cur-rently supported, and we highlight that keeping a similar rate of progress is paramount to properly serve the robot learning community. Second, the coverage in terms of robot learning algorithms is also non-exhaustive. We provide strong, reproducible implementations across key paradigms, while extending the library with additional algorithms remains future work. Third, achieving strong prac-tical inference performance still requires low-level optimization (quantization, graph compilation, etc) that are currently disregarded by the library. We view these limitations as concrete, tractable avenues for community contributions and future development, and in the very spirit of open-source, invite the broader robot learning community to address them. However, despite these limitations, our work takes a significant step toward an end-to-end stack for robot learning, providing a useful tool for researchers and practioners in the field. 

# REFERENCES 

Jorge Aldaco, Travis Armstrong, Robert Baruch, Jeff Bingham, Sanky Chan, Kenneth Draper, De-bidatta Dwibedi, Chelsea Finn, Pete Florence, Spencer Goodrich, et al. Aloha 2: An enhanced low-cost hardware for bimanual teleoperation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.02292 , 2024. 10 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Philip J. Ball, Laura Smith, Ilya Kostrikov, and Sergey Levine. Efficient Online Reinforcement Learning with Offline Data, May 2023. Kostas E. Bekris, Joe Doerr, Patrick Meng, and Sumanth Tangirala. The State of Robot Motion Generation, October 2024. Johan Bjorck, Fernando Castañeda, Nikita Cherniadev, Xingye Da, Runyu Ding, Linxi "Jim" Fan, Yu Fang, Dieter Fox, Fengyuan Hu, Spencer Huang, Joel Jang, Zhenyu Jiang, Jan Kautz, Kaushil Kundalia, Lawrence Lao, Zhiqi Li, Zongyu Lin, Kevin Lin, Guilin Liu, Edith Llontop, Loic Magne, Ajay Mandlekar, Avnish Narayan, Soroush Nasiriany, Scott Reed, You Liang Tan, Guanzhi Wang, Zu Wang, Jing Wang, Qi Wang, Jiannan Xiang, Yuqi Xie, Yinzhen Xu, Zhenjia Xu, Seonghyeon Ye, Zhiding Yu, Ao Zhang, Hao Zhang, Yizhou Zhao, Ruijie Zheng, and Yuke Zhu. GR00T N1: An Open Foundation Model for Generalist Humanoid Robots, March 2025. Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Szymon Jakubczak, Tim Jones, Liyiming Ke, Sergey Levine, Adrian Li-Bell, Mohith Mothukuri, Suraj Nair, Karl Pertsch, Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, James Tanner, Quan Vuong, Anna Walling, Haohuan Wang, and Ury Zhilinsky. $ π_0$: A Vision-Language-Action Flow Model for General Robot Control, October 2024. Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Joseph Dabis, Chelsea Finn, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Jasmine Hsu, Julian Ibarz, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Tomas Jackson, Sally Jesmonth, Nikhil J. Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalash-nikov, Yuheng Kuang, Isabel Leal, Kuang-Huei Lee, Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Utsav Malla, Deek-sha Manjunath, Igor Mordatch, Ofir Nachum, Carolina Parada, Jodilyn Peralta, Emily Perez, Karl Pertsch, Jornell Quiambao, Kanishka Rao, Michael Ryoo, Grecia Salazar, Pannag Sanketi, Kevin Sayed, Jaspiar Singh, Sumedh Sontakke, Austin Stone, Clayton Tan, Huong Tran, Vincent Vanhoucke, Steve Vega, Quan Vuong, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Tianhe Yu, and Brianna Zitkovich. RT-1: Robotics Transformer for Real-World Control at Scale, August 2023. Cheng Chi, Zhenjia Xu, Siyuan Feng, Eric Cousineau, Yilun Du, Benjamin Burchfiel, Russ Tedrake, and Shuran Song. Diffusion Policy: Visuomotor Policy Learning via Action Diffusion, March 2024. Open X.-Embodiment Collaboration, Abby O’Neill, Abdul Rehman, Abhinav Gupta, Abhiram Maddukuri, Abhishek Gupta, Abhishek Padalkar, Abraham Lee, Acorn Pooley, Agrim Gupta, Ajay Mandlekar, Ajinkya Jain, Albert Tung, Alex Bewley, Alex Herzog, Alex Irpan, Alexander Khazatsky, Anant Rai, Anchit Gupta, Andrew Wang, Andrey Kolobov, Anikait Singh, Animesh Garg, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Annie Xie, Anthony Brohan, Antonin Raffin, Archit Sharma, Arefeh Yavary, Arhan Jain, Ashwin Balakrishna, Ayzaan Wahid, Ben Burgess-Limerick, Beomjoon Kim, Bernhard Schölkopf, Blake Wulfe, Brian Ichter, Cewu Lu, Charles Xu, Charlotte Le, Chelsea Finn, Chen Wang, Chenfeng Xu, Cheng Chi, Chenguang Huang, Christine Chan, Christopher Agia, Chuer Pan, Chuyuan Fu, Coline Devin, Danfei Xu, Daniel Morton, Danny Driess, Daphne Chen, Deepak Pathak, Dhruv Shah, Dieter Büchler, Dinesh Jayaraman, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Dorsa Sadigh, Edward Johns, Ethan Foster, Fangchen Liu, Federico Ceola, Fei Xia, Feiyu Zhao, Felipe Vieira Frujeri, Freek Stulp, Gaoyue Zhou, Gaurav S. Sukhatme, Gautam Salhotra, Ge Yan, Gilbert Feng, Giulio Schiavi, Glen Berseth, Gregory Kahn, Guangwen Yang, Guanzhi Wang, Hao Su, Hao-Shu Fang, Haochen Shi, Henghui Bao, Heni Ben Amor, Henrik I. Christensen, Hiroki Furuta, Homanga Bharadhwaj, Homer Walke, Hongjie Fang, Huy Ha, Igor Mordatch, Ilija Radosavovic, Isabel Leal, Jacky Liang, Jad Abou-Chakra, Jaehyung Kim, Jaimyn Drake, Jan Peters, Jan Schneider, Jasmine Hsu, Jay Vakil, Jeannette Bohg, Jeffrey Bingham, Jeffrey Wu, Jensen Gao, Jiaheng Hu, Jiajun Wu, Jialin Wu, Jiankai Sun, Jianlan Luo, Jiayuan Gu, Jie Tan, Jihoon Oh, Jimmy Wu, Jingpei Lu, Jingyun Yang, Jitendra Malik, João Silvério, Joey Hejna, Jonathan Booher, Jonathan Tompson, Jonathan Yang, Jordi Salvador, Joseph J. Lim, Jun-hyek Han, Kaiyuan Wang, Kanishka Rao, Karl Pertsch, Karol Hausman, Keegan Go, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Ken Goldberg, Kendra Byrne, Kenneth Oslund, Kento Kawaharazuka, Kevin Black, Kevin Lin, Kevin Zhang, Kiana Ehsani, Kiran Lekkala, Kirsty Ellis, Krishan Rana, Krish-nan Srinivasan, Kuan Fang, Kunal Pratap Singh, Kuo-Hao Zeng, Kyle Hatch, Kyle Hsu, Laurent Itti, Lawrence Yunliang Chen, Lerrel Pinto, Li Fei-Fei, Liam Tan, Linxi "Jim" Fan, Lionel Ott, Lisa Lee, Luca Weihs, Magnum Chen, Marion Lepert, Marius Memmel, Masayoshi Tomizuka, Masha Itkina, Mateo Guaman Castro, Max Spero, Maximilian Du, Michael Ahn, Michael C. Yip, 11 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Mingtong Zhang, Mingyu Ding, Minho Heo, Mohan Kumar Srirama, Mohit Sharma, Moo Jin Kim, Muhammad Zubair Irshad, Naoaki Kanazawa, Nicklas Hansen, Nicolas Heess, Nikhil J. Joshi, Niko Suenderhauf, Ning Liu, Norman Di Palo, Nur Muhammad Mahi Shafiullah, Oier Mees, Oliver Kroemer, Osbert Bastani, Pannag R. Sanketi, Patrick "Tree" Miller, Patrick Yin, Paul Wohlhart, Peng Xu, Peter David Fagan, Peter Mitrano, Pierre Sermanet, Pieter Abbeel, Priya Sundaresan, Qiuyu Chen, Quan Vuong, Rafael Rafailov, Ran Tian, Ria Doshi, Roberto Martín-Martín, Rohan Baijal, Rosario Scalise, Rose Hendrix, Roy Lin, Runjia Qian, Ruohan Zhang, Russell Mendonca, Rutav Shah, Ryan Hoque, Ryan Julian, Samuel Bustamante, Sean Kirmani, Sergey Levine, Shan Lin, Sherry Moore, Shikhar Bahl, Shivin Dass, Shubham Sonawani, Shub-ham Tulsiani, Shuran Song, Sichun Xu, Siddhant Haldar, Siddharth Karamcheti, Simeon Ade-bola, Simon Guist, Soroush Nasiriany, Stefan Schaal, Stefan Welker, Stephen Tian, Subramanian Ramamoorthy, Sudeep Dasari, Suneel Belkhale, Sungjae Park, Suraj Nair, Suvir Mirchandani, Takayuki Osa, Tanmay Gupta, Tatsuya Harada, Tatsuya Matsushima, Ted Xiao, Thomas Kollar, Tianhe Yu, Tianli Ding, Todor Davchev, Tony Z. Zhao, Travis Armstrong, Trevor Darrell, Trin-ity Chung, Vidhi Jain, Vikash Kumar, Vincent Vanhoucke, Vitor Guizilini, Wei Zhan, Wenxuan Zhou, Wolfram Burgard, Xi Chen, Xiangyu Chen, Xiaolong Wang, Xinghao Zhu, Xinyang Geng, Xiyuan Liu, Xu Liangwei, Xuanlin Li, Yansong Pang, Yao Lu, Yecheng Jason Ma, Yejin Kim, Yevgen Chebotar, Yifan Zhou, Yifeng Zhu, Yilin Wu, Ying Xu, Yixuan Wang, Yonatan Bisk, Yongqiang Dou, Yoonyoung Cho, Youngwoon Lee, Yuchen Cui, Yue Cao, Yueh-Hua Wu, Yujin Tang, Yuke Zhu, Yunchu Zhang, Yunfan Jiang, Yunshuang Li, Yunzhu Li, Yusuke Iwasawa, Yu-taka Matsuo, Zehan Ma, Zhuo Xu, Zichen Jeff Cui, Zichen Zhang, Zipeng Fu, and Zipeng Lin. Open X-Embodiment: Robotic Learning Datasets and RT-X Models, May 2025. Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929 , 2020. Pete Florence, Corey Lynch, Andy Zeng, Oscar A. Ramirez, Ayzaan Wahid, Laura Downs, Adrian Wong, Johnny Lee, Igor Mordatch, and Jonathan Tompson. Implicit Behavioral Cloning. In 

Proceedings of the 5th Conference on Robot Learning , pp. 158–168. PMLR, January 2022. Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft Actor-Critic: Off-Policy Maximum Entropy Deep Reinforcement Learning with a Stochastic Actor, August 2018. Nicklas Hansen, Xiaolong Wang, and Hao Su. Temporal Difference Learning for Model Predictive Control, July 2022. Hello Robot. Stretch 3®: A fully integrated mobile manipulator. https:// hello-robot.com/stretch-3-product , 2025. URL https://hello-robot. com/stretch-3-product . Last accessed: 22 September 2025. Peter Henderson, Riashat Islam, Philip Bachman, Joelle Pineau, Doina Precup, and David Meger. Deep reinforcement learning that matters. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 32, 2018. Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models, December 2020. Eric Jang, Alex Irpan, Mohi Khansari, Daniel Kappler, Frederik Ebert, Corey Lynch, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. BC-Z: Zero-Shot Task Generalization with Robotic Imitation Learning, Febru-ary 2022. Alexander Khazatsky, Karl Pertsch, Suraj Nair, Ashwin Balakrishna, Sudeep Dasari, Siddharth Karamcheti, Soroush Nasiriany, Mohan Kumar Srirama, Lawrence Yunliang Chen, Kirsty Ellis, Peter David Fagan, Joey Hejna, Masha Itkina, Marion Lepert, Yecheng Jason Ma, Patrick Tree Miller, Jimmy Wu, Suneel Belkhale, Shivin Dass, Huy Ha, Arhan Jain, Abraham Lee, Young-woon Lee, Marius Memmel, Sungjae Park, Ilija Radosavovic, Kaiyuan Wang, Albert Zhan, Kevin Black, Cheng Chi, Kyle Beltran Hatch, Shan Lin, Jingpei Lu, Jean Mercat, Abdul Rehman, Pan-nag R. Sanketi, Archit Sharma, Cody Simpson, Quan Vuong, Homer Rich Walke, Blake Wulfe, Ted Xiao, Jonathan Heewon Yang, Arefeh Yavary, Tony Z. Zhao, Christopher Agia, Rohan Baijal, Mateo Guaman Castro, Daphne Chen, Qiuyu Chen, Trinity Chung, Jaimyn Drake, Ethan Paul 12 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Foster, Jensen Gao, Vitor Guizilini, David Antonio Herrera, Minho Heo, Kyle Hsu, Jiaheng Hu, Muhammad Zubair Irshad, Donovon Jackson, Charlotte Le, Yunshuang Li, Kevin Lin, Roy Lin, Zehan Ma, Abhiram Maddukuri, Suvir Mirchandani, Daniel Morton, Tony Nguyen, Abigail O’Neill, Rosario Scalise, Derick Seale, Victor Son, Stephen Tian, Emi Tran, Andrew E. Wang, Yilin Wu, Annie Xie, Jingyun Yang, Patrick Yin, Yunchu Zhang, Osbert Bastani, Glen Berseth, Jeannette Bohg, Ken Goldberg, Abhinav Gupta, Abhishek Gupta, Dinesh Jayaraman, Joseph J. Lim, Jitendra Malik, Roberto Martín-Martín, Subramanian Ramamoorthy, Dorsa Sadigh, Shuran Song, Jiajun Wu, Michael C. Yip, Yuke Zhu, Thomas Kollar, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. DROID: A Large-Scale In-The-Wild Robot Manipulation Dataset, April 2025. Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes, December 2022. Rob Knight, Pepijn Kooijmans, Thomas Wolf, Simon Alibert, Michel Aractingi, Dana Aubakirova, Adil Zouitine, Russi Martino, Steven Palma, Caroline Pascal, and Remi Cadene. Standard Open SO-100 & SO-101 Arms, 2024. Jens Kober, J Andrew Bagnell, and Jan Peters. Reinforcement learning in robotics: A survey. The International Journal of Robotics Research , 32(11):1238–1274, 2013. Seungjae Lee, Yibin Wang, Haritheja Etukuru, H. Jin Kim, Nur Muhammad Mahi Shafiullah, and Lerrel Pinto. Behavior Generation with Latent Actions, June 2024. Yaron Lipman, Ricky T. Q. Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maximilian Nickel, and Matt Le. Flow Matching for Generative Modeling, February 2023. Bo Liu, Yifeng Zhu, Chongkai Gao, Yihao Feng, Qiang Liu, Yuke Zhu, and Peter Stone. Libero: Benchmarking knowledge transfer for lifelong robot learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:44776–44791, 2023. Jianlan Luo, Charles Xu, Jeffrey Wu, and Sergey Levine. Precise and Dexterous Robotic Manipula-tion via Human-in-the-Loop Reinforcement Learning, October 2024. Jianlan Luo, Zheyuan Hu, Charles Xu, You Liang Tan, Jacob Berg, Archit Sharma, Stefan Schaal, Chelsea Finn, Abhishek Gupta, and Sergey Levine. SERL: A Software Suite for Sample-Efficient Robotic Reinforcement Learning, March 2025. Sébastien Mick, Mattieu Lapeyre, Pierre Rouanet, Christophe Halgand, Jenny Benois-Pineau, Flo-rent Paclet, Daniel Cattaert, Pierre-Yves Oudeyer, and Aymar de Rugy. Reachy, a 3d-printed human-like robotic arm as a testbed for human-robot control strategies. Frontiers in neuro-robotics , 13:65, 2019. Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wier-stra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing Atari with Deep Reinforcement Learning, December 2013. Jess Moss. koch-v1.1: A version 1.1 of the alexander koch low cost robot arm with some small changes, September 22 2025. URL https://github.com/jess-moss/koch-v1-1 .GitHub repository, Apache-2.0 license. OpenAI. GPT-4 Technical Report, March 2024. Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019. Dean A. Pomerleau. ALVINN: An Autonomous Land Vehicle in a Neural Network. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 1. Morgan-Kaufmann, 1988. Mustafa Shukor, Dana Aubakirova, Francesco Capuano, Pepijn Kooijmans, Steven Palma, Adil Zouitine, Michel Aractingi, Caroline Pascal, Martino Russi, Andres Marafioti, Simon Alibert, Matthieu Cord, Thomas Wolf, and Remi Cadene. SmolVLA: A Vision-Language-Action Model for Affordable and Efficient Robotics, June 2025. 13 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Bruno Siciliano and Oussama Khatib (eds.). Springer Handbook of Robotics . Springer Handbooks. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2016. ISBN 978-3-319-32550-7 978-3-319-32552-1. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-32552-1. SIGRobotics-UIUC. LeKiwi: Low-Cost Mobile Manipulator. https://github.com/ SIGRobotics-UIUC/LeKiwi , September 22 2025. URL https://github.com/ SIGRobotics-UIUC/LeKiwi . GitHub repository, Apache-2.0 license. Kihyuk Sohn, Honglak Lee, and Xinchen Yan. Learning Structured Output Representation using Deep Conditional Generative Models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 28. Curran Associates, Inc., 2015. Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction . Adaptive Computation and Machine Learning Series. The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, second edition edition, 2018. ISBN 978-0-262-03924-6. TheRobotStudio. HOPEJr/Arm: Robotic Arm Module of HOPEJr. https://github. com/TheRobotStudio/HOPEJr/tree/main/Arm , September 22 2025. URL https: //github.com/TheRobotStudio/HOPEJr/tree/main/Arm . GitHub repository, ac-cessed: 22 September 2025. Philipp Wu, Yide Shentu, Zhongke Yi, Xingyu Lin, and Pieter Abbeel. Gello: A general, low-cost, and intuitive teleoperation framework for robot manipulators. In 2024 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pp. 12156–12163. IEEE, 2024. Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning. In Conference on robot learning , pp. 1094–1100. PMLR, 2020. Tony Z. Zhao, Vikash Kumar, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Learning Fine-Grained Bimanual Manipulation with Low-Cost Hardware, April 2023. 

# A OPENLY -AVAILABLE ROBOTS 

• SO-10X Guide from Knight et al. (2024): https://github.com/ TheRobotStudio/SO-ARM100 .• Koch-v1.1 Guide from Moss (2025): https://github.com/jess-moss/ koch-v1-1 

• ALOHA Guide from Zhao et al. (2023) here. • HopeJR-Arm Guide from TheRobotStudio (2025): https://github.com/ TheRobotStudio/HOPEJr/blob/main/Arm/BOM.md 

• LeKiwi Guide from SIGRobotics-UIUC (2025): https://github.com/ SIGRobotics-UIUC/LeKiwi/blob/main/BOM.md 

# B REAL -WORLD ROBOTS API                                

> 1from lerobot.teleoperators.so100_leader.so100_leader import \
> 2SO100Leader
> 3from lerobot.teleoperators.so100_follower.so100_follower import \
> 4SO100Follower
> 56teleop =SO100Leader()
> 7#(provided teleop matches) can also be Reachy-2, LeKiwi, etc.
> 8robot =SO100Follower()
> 910 teleop.connect()
> 11 robot.connect()
> 12 13 action =teleop.get_action()

14 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

Robot # Datasets 

unknown 2370 lekiwi 535 arx5 371 aloha 334 aiworker 202     

> (a) Top-5 robot platforms in the "Other" category for number of datasets.

Robot # Downloads 

unknown 711729 google_robot 438560 so101 319586 so100 278697 aloha 45219     

> (b) Top-5 robot platforms in the "Other" category for number of downloads.

Robot # Episodes 

google_robot 213852 unknown 170706 so100 78510 so101 58299 easo 45652     

> (c) Top-5 robot platforms in the "Other" category for number of episodes.

Table 4: Breakdown of the Other category by top-5 robot platforms across datasets, downloads, and episodes. 

Figure 9: Openly-available datasets with the largest number of downloads using the 

LeRobotDataset format. The most downloaded datasets are academic benchmarks released by the research community (Collaboration et al., 2025; Khazatsky et al., 2025).                           

> 14 print(action)
> 15 #{’shoulder_pan.pos’: 84.74,
> 16 #’shoulder_lift.pos’: 4.95,
> 17 #’elbow_flex.pos’: 70.6,
> 18 #’wrist_flex.pos’: -88.41,
> 19 #’wrist_roll.pos’: 57.89,
> 20 #’gripper.pos’: 4.13}
> 21 22 robot.send_action(action) #moves robot according to ‘action‘

# C DATASETS 

Table 4 further breaks down the Other category for the number of downloads, datasets and episodes, and it shows how faulty dataset that do not explicitly record the robot platform used (tagged as 

unknown ) dominate in the Other category. Figure 9 shows the most downloaded datasets by robot type. Crucially, the largest number of down-loads is not achieved for a platform natively integrated in lerobot , further undescoring the adop-tion of the LeRobotDataset format in the robotics community. C.1 STREAMING DATASETS 

The development of StreamingLeRobotDataset addresses several fundamental chal-lenges associated with the efficient utilization of large-scale robotic datasets in robot learning pipelines. Traditional approaches to dataset handling rely on pre-loading data into local mem-ory, which becomes increasingly impractical as datasets grow to the million-episodes scale. 

StreamingLeRobotDataset supports a streaming paradigm, whereby frames —defined as in-dividual items in a dataset—are fetched on-demand from remote storage rather than preloaded in their entirety. This architectural shift required addressing three core challenges: (1) efficient data access under strict memory constraints, (2) ensuring sufficient randomness during iteration to sup-15 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

(a) Timing performance of stepping through single frames of a StreamingLeRobotDataset com-pared to a pre-loaded LeRobotDataset .

(b) Timing performance of stepping through a dataset retrieving multiple frames of a

StreamingLeRobotDataset compared to apre-loaded LeRobotDataset .

Figure 10: Timing performance of StreamingLeRobotDataset versus a regular 

LeRobotDataset .port robust learning, and (3) enabling multi-frame retrieval in a setting that is inherently sequential and non-indexable. 

Efficient Streaming of Large-Scale Data. The LeRobotDataset format partitions robotic data into tabular records ( .parquet files) and compressed videos ( .mp4 files), alongside lightweight metadata. Metadata files are downloaded fully due to their negligible size relative to the dataset, but all high-volume video and control streams are processed on demand. This is achieved through two principal design choices: (1) adoption of an IterableDataset interface, and (2) integration with 

torchcodec for on-the-fly video decoding. These components together enable data consumption through simple iterative calls, while maintaining memory usage bounded irrespective of dataset size. Provided a good network connectivity, Figure 10 shows timing performance is comparable between the two formats in the steady-state regime (after initialization). C.2 EXAMPLE : U SE A DATASET  

> 1

import torch  

> 2

from lerobot.datasets.lerobot_dataset import LeRobotDataset  

> 34

delta_timestamps = { 

> 5

# 0.2, and 0.1 seconds *before* each frame  

> 6

"observation.images.wrist_camera": [-0.2, -0.1, 0.0]  

> 7

} 

> 89

# Optionally, use StreamingLeRobotDataset to avoid downloading the dataset  

> 10

dataset = LeRobotDataset(  

> 11

"lerobot/svla_so101_pickplace",  

> 12

delta_timestamps=delta_timestamps  

> 13

) 

> 14 15

# Get frame in the dataset by their index  

> 16

sample = dataset[0]  

> 17

print(sample)  

> 18

# { 

> 19

# ’observation.state’: tensor([...]),  

> 20

# ’action’: tensor([...]),  

> 21

# # extra dimension due to delta timesteps  

> 22

# ’observation.images.wrist_camera’: tensor([3, C, H, W])  

> 23

# ...  

> 24

# } 

> 25 26

batch_size=16  

> 27

# wrap the dataset in a DataLoader for training/inference purposes 

16 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

(a) Models uploaded by policy type. Policies not present have not been publicly uploaded. 

(b) Models downloaded by policy type. Policies not present have not been publicly downloaded.  

> 28

data_loader = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(  

> 29

dataset,  

> 30

batch_size=batch_size  

> 31

) 

> 32 33

# Iterate over the DataLoader in a training loop  

> 34

num_epochs = 1 

> 35

device = "cuda" if torch.cuda.is_available() else "cpu"  

> 36 37

for epoch in range(num_epochs):  

> 38

for batch in data_loader:  

> 39

# Move data to the appropriate device (e.g., GPU)  

> 40

observations = batch["observation.state"].to(device)  

> 41

actions = batch["action"].to(device)  

> 42

images = batch["observation.images.wrist_camera"].to(device)  

> 43 44

# Next, process the data for training or inference  

> 45

... 

C.3 EXAMPLE : U SE A STREAMING DATASET  

> 1

from lerobot.datasets.streaming_dataset import StreamingLeRobotDataset  

> 23

# Streams frames on the fly without downloading the dataset  

> 4

dataset = StreamingLeRobotDataset(  

> 5

"lerobot/svla_so101_pickplace",  

> 6

delta_timestamps=delta_timestamps  

> 7

)

# D MODELS 

D.1 EXAMPLE : T RAIN A MODEL  

> 1

import torch  

> 23

from lerobot.configs.types import FeatureType  

> 4

from lerobot.datasets.lerobot_dataset import ( 

> 5

LeRobotDataset, LeRobotDatasetMetadata  

> 6

) 

> 7

from lerobot.datasets.utils import dataset_to_policy_features  

> 8

from lerobot.policies.factory import make_pre_post_processors  

> 910

# Users can use many plug-in policies from the library  

> 11

from lerobot.policies.diffusion.configuration_diffusion import \ 

> 12

DiffusionConfig 

17 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026  

> 13

from lerobot.policies.diffusion.modeling_diffusion import DiffusionPolicy  

> 14 15

output_directory = "outputs/train/example_pusht_diffusion"  

> 16

device = torch.device("cuda")  

> 17

training_steps = 5000  

> 18

log_freq = 1 

> 19 20

repo_id = "lerobot/pusht" # Replace with your dataset  

> 21

dataset_metadata = LeRobotDatasetMetadata(repo_id)  

> 22 23

features = dataset_to_policy_features(dataset_metadata.features)  

> 24

output_features = { 

> 25

key: ft for key, ft in features.items()  

> 26

if ft.type is FeatureType.ACTION  

> 27

} 

> 28

input_features = { 

> 29

key: ft for key, ft in features.items()  

> 30

if key not in output_features  

> 31

} 

> 32 33

cfg = DiffusionConfig(  

> 34

input_features=input_features,  

> 35

output_features=output_features  

> 36

) 

> 37 38

policy = DiffusionPolicy(cfg)  

> 39

policy.train()  

> 40

policy.to(device)  

> 41

preprocessor, postprocessor = make_pre_post_processors(  

> 42

cfg, dataset_stats=dataset_metadata.stats  

> 43

) 

> 44 45 46

delta_timestamps = { 

> 47

"observation.image": [-0.1, 0.0],  

> 48

"observation.state": [-0.1, 0.0],  

> 49

"action": [ 

> 50

-0.1, 0.0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6,  

> 51

0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 1.0, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4  

> 52

],  

> 53

} 

> 54 55

dataset = LeRobotDataset(repo_id, delta_timestamps=delta_timestamps)  

> 56 57

optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(policy.parameters(), lr=1e-4)  

> 58

dataloader = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(  

> 59

dataset,  

> 60

num_workers=4,  

> 61

batch_size=64,  

> 62

shuffle=True,  

> 63

pin_memory=device.type != "cpu",  

> 64

drop_last=True,  

> 65

) 

> 66 67

step = 0 

> 68

done = False  

> 69

while not done:  

> 70

for batch in dataloader:  

> 71

batch = preprocessor(batch)  

> 72

loss, _ = policy.forward(batch)  

> 73

loss.backward()  

> 74

optimizer.step()  

> 75

optimizer.zero_grad()  

> 76 77

if step % log_freq == 0: 

18 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026  

> 78

print(f"step: {step} loss: {loss.item():.3f}")  

> 79

step += 1 

> 80

if step >= training_steps:  

> 81

done = True  

> 82

break  

> 83 84

# Save a policy checkpoint.  

> 85

policy.save_pretrained(output_directory)  

> 86

preprocessor.save_pretrained(output_directory)  

> 87

postprocessor.save_pretrained(output_directory) 

D.2 EXAMPLE : U SE A PRE -TRAINED MODEL  

> 1

from typing import Any  

> 2

from lerobot.policies.smolvla.configuration_smolvla import \ 

> 3

SmolVLAConfig  

> 4

from lerobot.policies.smolvla.modeling_smolvla import SmolVLAPolicy  

> 5

from lerobot.datasets.lerobot_dataset import \ 

> 6

LeRobotDatasetMetadata  

> 78

from lerobot.policies.factory import make_pre_post_processors  

> 9

from lerobot.teleoperators.so100_follower.so100_follower import \ 

> 10

SO100Follower  

> 11 12

# Take a dataset on which SmolVLA was trained, for normalization  

> 13

repo_id = "lerobot/svla_so101_pickplace"  

> 14

dataset_metadata = LeRobotDatasetMetadata(repo_id)  

> 15 16

cfg = SmolVLAConfig()  

> 17

policy = SmolVLAPolicy(cfg)  

> 18

preprocessor, postprocessor = make_pre_post_processors(  

> 19

cfg, dataset_stats=dataset_metadata.stats  

> 20

) 

> 21 22

robot = SO100Follower(...)  

> 23

raw_obs: dict[str, Any] = robot.get_observation()  

> 24 25

# Preprocess the observation for inference  

> 26

policy_input = preprocessor(raw_obs)  

> 27

# Select the action from the policy  

> 28

policy_output = policy.select_action(policy_input)  

> 29

# Postprocess the action for the robot  

> 30

policy_action = postprocessor(policy_output)  

> 31 32

robot.send_action(policy_action) 

# E INFERENCE 

Optimized inference accelerate cycle times across multiple tasks with comparable performance (Ta-ble 5), and provide a scalable path to higher model capacity without compromising on real-time control, provided access to a network. In particular, the speedup presented in Table 5 derives from 

logical decoupling—asynchronously computing the next chunk while the current one has not been exhausted yet—rather than physical decoupling, as both the server and client run on the same ma-chine, though in principle the inference stack allows for communication between different machines. E.1 EXAMPLE : H OST A REMOTE SERVER  

> 1

# Run this script to start the policy server on any machine  

> 2

from lerobot.scripts.server.configs import PolicyServerConfig  

> 3

from lerobot.scripts.server.policy_server import serve  

> 45

config = PolicyServerConfig(  

> 6

host="localhost", 

19 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026             

> Inference Success Rate (%)
> Pick-Place Stacking Sorting Avg Sync 75 90 70 78.3 Async 80 90 50 73.3

(a) Performance (success rates).          

> Inference Time (s)
> Total Avg Std Sync 137.5 13.75 2.42 Async 97.0 9.70 2.95

(b) Task completion time.          

> Inference # of Cubes
> Total Avg Std Sync 91.8 0.45 Async 19 3.8 1.3

(c) Performance in fixed time (60s per each episode). 

Table 5: Comparison between regular (Sync) and optimized (Async) inference. We evaluate the SmolVLA implementation provided in lerobot on three real-world performed using the SO-100 arm, consisting of (1) pick and place cubes (2) stacking cubes on top of each other and (3) sorting cubes. lerobot ’s decoupled inference schema achieves similar success rates (left) but results in significantly reduced cycle times (middle) and thus higher throughput (right), over the 10 test episodes (60s each) for the task considered.  

> 7

port=8080,  

> 8

) 

> 9

serve(config) 

E.2 EXAMPLE : S TREAM ACTIONS TO A ROBOT  

> 1

# Run this script to start the robot client on the robot’s computer  

> 2

import threading  

> 3

from lerobot.scripts.server.configs import RobotClientConfig  

> 4

from lerobot.scripts.server.robot_client import RobotClient  

> 567

camera_cfg = ... # cameras used by the visuomotor policy  

> 8

robot_cfg = ... # a given robot supported by the library  

> 910

# 3. Create client configuration  

> 11

client_cfg = RobotClientConfig(  

> 12

robot=robot_cfg,  

> 13

# attach to the server running the policy  

> 14

server_address="localhost:8080",  

> 15

# use a higher-end device for inference  

> 16

policy_device="cuda:0",  

> 17

policy_type="pi0",  

> 18

pretrained_name_or_path="lerobot/pi0"  

> 19

) 

> 20 21

# 4. Create and start client  

> 22

client = RobotClient(client_cfg)  

> 23 24

task = ... # Specify the task using natural language  

> 25 26

if client.start():  

> 27

# Start action receiver thread  

> 28

action_receiver_thread = threading.Thread(  

> 29

target=client.receive_actions, daemon=True  

> 30

) 

> 31

action_receiver_thread.start()  

> 32 33

try:  

> 34

# Run the control loop  

> 35

client.control_loop(task)  

> 36

except KeyboardInterrupt:  

> 37

client.stop()  

> 38

action_receiver_thread.join() 

20